 75K811 School Name: P.S. K811 CONNIE LEKAS SCHOOL Principal: ANTOINETTE ROSE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Connie Lekas School 307500013811 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 School Number (DBN): 97K811 2525 Haring Street, Brooklyn, New York 11235 (718) 769-6984 Phone Number: (718) 648-7816 Fax: Ms. Antoinette Rose ARose3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Ms. Antoinette Rose Charles Jacobs QuissyOrtega Ms. Antoinette Rose SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ashley Phillips N/A District Information District 75 Mr. KetlerLouissant Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent: 400 First Street, New York, N.Y. 10010 Klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 802-1503 Phone Number: District 75 FSC: (212) 802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Kathleen Lefevre Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 400 First Avenue, New York, N.Y., 10010 KLefevr@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-802-1534 Phone Number: 212-802-1655 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. Antoinette Rose Mr. Charles Jacobs Ms. QuissyOrtega Ms. Sharon Williams Ashley Phillips Quentin Jones *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Paraprofessional   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Luis Benitez Sandy Page Marjorie Charles Sharon Stoves ShanealCumberbatch Lauren Fiengold Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At the Connie Lekas School, our goal is to provide an educational environment that will prepare students to be independent and, for college and/or career readiness. By meeting students at their individual entry points we engage students in different modalities for learning. The shared efforts of students, parents, and staff result in lifelong learners, problem solvers, and productive citizens in the global community.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Connie Lekas School/P811K is located in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn. We are a special education school under District 75/Brooklyn South. 811K currently serves more than 300 students in our Junior High School, High School, Inclusion and Transition programs. Our students, whose ages range from 11-21 years, have a broad range of abilities, challenges, and disability classifications, which include: students on the autism spectrum; students with severe to profound cognitive challenges; and students with multiple disabilities. Our students require a high level of support and modified curricula to achieve academic, vocational, and social/emotional success. Students are referred to 811K by recommendations based on academic, social/emotional, and management needs contained within their Individualized Education Plans (IEP). The school is comprised of a self-contained main site, which houses about 31 classes inclusive of Bilingual, ENL, and in-school community-based work study classes. Classes at our main site include 12:1:1, 8:1:1, 6:1:1, and 12:1:4 class settings divided into three grade bands: Junior High School; High School; and Transition. There are three (3) co-located satellite sites: Shellbank Junior High School serving one (1) class of students fully participating in inclusive education; Edward R. Murrow High School serving two (2) classes of students fully participating in inclusive education and work study; and Joseph B Cavallaro Junior High School serving one (1) class of students fully participating in inclusive education. The Connie Lekas School’s mission and vision anticipates an environment of high expectations promoting student achievement and independence through a rigorous curriculum that cultivates lifelong learners, problem solvers, and productive citizens of a diverse global community. Utilizing appropriately multiple entry points to challenging and tiered common-core aligned performance tasks, we provide opportunities for higher-order thinking suitable for all learners. We aim to establish critical thinking skills as a key component of our students' personal tool-kits, complemented by diverse educational opportunities that simulate real-world experience and the transfer of instructional knowledge to practical application. Students attending the Connie Lekas School have the opportunity to participate in instruction aligned to the NYS CCLS Standards and Alternate Assessment Standards (NYSAA) in all core content areas: ELA; Math; Science; and Social Studies. Furthermore, the Connie Lekas School/P811K provides students opportunities to participate in Digital Photography, Technology, Performing Arts, Fine Arts, and Industrial Arts related classes. Students are also offered opportunities to participate in Vocational, Career Development, and Occupational Studies (CDOS) courses both in and outside of the school. Students learn work-related skills in a growing selection of fields, including: carpentry; retail; elder care; custodial & building maintenance; recycling & sustainability management; and the food service industries. The vast variety of academic courses and vocational experiences offered at the Connie Lekas School/P811K prepare students for successful transitions from school to productive and fulfilling post-secondary life outcomes as mandated through their Individualized Educational Transition Plans. As post-21 placement and services have become exponentially more difficult for parents to obtain since the enactment of the Front Door protocol, students who gain work-study experience during their secondary education are much more likely to be accepted as candidates by agencies than those students without previous exposure to work environments. 811K provides students from ages 16-21 community-based instruction and work-study opportunities both on and off-site to ensure our students are poised for acceptance into the agencies that will provide the best possible post-secondary outcomes. 811K has expanded available work-study opportunities such that 30% of our student population has participated in our work-study program thus far. We presently maintain partnership with a growing list of businesses such as 7-Eleven, CVS, Shorefront Y, Goodwill, Gateway Recreation Center, Party City, Dunkin Donuts, Kingsbay Y, and J & A Variety Store. The Connie Lekas School understands that students are most successful when their entire families can be involved in their education and transition planning.We host a diverse variety of opportunities for parents to be involved in the school community both in person and online, including Family Arts Days, curriculum nights, transition & college fairs, trainings & workshops, parent-teacher conferences, online engagement, and other events. To make these events 0  accessible to working families, we offer family friendly events during evenings, weekends, and weekdays. We value parent involvement at every level and encourage our parents to partner with us in giving our students the most powerful and engaging learning experience possible. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. There is a significant representation of culturally diverse students as reflected in the more than ten (10) languages spoken by students who are Bilingual and English Language Learners (ELL). All classes are served with licensed teachers and paraprofessionals who speak the students’ native language. Parents are supported via communication offered in their native language and workshops by native language presenters. Title III programs are offered to students and parents that focus on Technology and English Language development. As a District 75 school, we serve students with a diverse range of special needs. We partner with our families to provide training, resources, and community building to ensure productive and successful academic and transition planning, which include Front Door training sessions hosted at our main site, transition fairs, trainings, and other community events. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We offer students a wide array of learning opportunities and provide them with all IEP-mandated related and support services, thus enabling them to achieve their maximum potential. Our programming provides a well-rounded educational experience that aligns with and parallels general education environments and standards. We strive to create teacher collaboration through effective leadership, which will result in a comprehensive Common Core Learning Standard (CCLS)-aligned curricula designed by teachers, for teachers. Our cohesive curriculum guides teachers to impact positive student outcomes demonstrating greater proficiency in state assessment scores. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75K811 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 335 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 90.4% % Reduced Lunch 29.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.3% 21.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 14.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 83.7% 0.6% 99.7% 51.6% 9.0% 3.3% 6 13% 8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To measure the academic gains our students are continually making, we use a variety of formative, summative and bench mark assessments. These include standardized, summative, and benchmark assessments: NYSAA, NYSESLAT, SANDI, and FAST; and formative assessments: unit pre/post-tests, projects, curricula assessments, teacher-made assignments, Level 1 Vocational Assessments, IEP progress monitoring assessments, rubrics, and Class Dojo. Teachers post assessment data on Engrade learning management system, is monitored by our data team, and accessible to parents through linked Engrade accounts. School surveys also provide additional data used to inform next steps. 2017-18 data from these assessments demonstrated 811K’s strengths. As of June 2018, 100% of alternate assessment students in 811K have been assessed using the Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) in the areas of Reading, Writing, Math, and Communication Development. Approximately 332 students across all 5 cohorts completed the SANDI assessment in the 2017-18 school year. Data analysis of the SANDI determined that students documented a 9.07% increase in Reading, 10% increase in Writing, a 11% increase in Mathematics, and an 8% increase in Communication Development from the fall baseline to the end of year assessment in the spring. Further data analysis also indicated that while students demonstrated significant progress in writing, writing still continues to be the lowest performing domain on the SANDI, with an average raw score of 121.45 of a possible 276. 277 students in 5 cohorts completed both the Math and ELA Formative Assessment of Standards Tasks (FAST) in the 2017-18 school year. Averages of our overall student population indicated that we greatly exceeded our goal of increasing student performance by 12% between Benchmarks 1 and 2 in both Math and ELA. Furthermore, our inclusion, 12:1:1, 8:1:1, and 6:1:1 cohorts all met or exceeded this target. Our 12:1:4 cohort, however, fell just below the target. While formative assessment in the classroom did show a great deal of improvement among this cohort and SANDI achievement was slightly higher, this was not reflected in the FAST assessment. FAST begins assessing students at SANDI items 14 in Reading, 11 in Writing, 7 in Math, and 11 in Communication Development. While many students in our 12:1:4 population are progressing on goals that target the important foundational skills addressed in the first 5 to 15 items in each SANDI subtest, which may be partially responsible for the below target result of the the 12:1:4 cohort. However, we take this as an opportunity to review instructional targets and practices with our early learners to ensure that they continue to receive the same quality of specially designed instruction as their peers. All teachers at 811K were enrolled in Professional Learning Communities (PLC) during the 2017-18 school year. PLCs provided opportunities for teachers to share and review student work collaboratively to ensure proper modification, scaffolding, and alignment to all relevant standards using the District 75 rubrics. Student work was presented in a variety of formats, such as worksheets, photographs, and videotapes. PLCs analyzed data and student work to identify strengths and needs and used their findings to collaboratively plan specially designed instruction. 3  At our school, we focus on maintaining high scholastic achievement and implement programs in efforts to enable students to reach their full potential. Reading for Informational Text is a skill that is transferred across all content areas and strategically integrates the instructional shifts. Focus standards (W.1, RI.1, SL, and OA) were chosen based on student summative data (SANDI/FAST). These focus standards were established to provide differentiated options and multiple entry points including multiple means of representation to ensure all students have opportunities (based on needs, interests, and Primary Mode of Communication (PMC)) to demonstrate their thinking and learning. Culminating projects are implemented into the curriculum to promote project-based learning, student-to-student collaboration, and student leadership. The intended outcome of this goal is to increase students’ ability to utilize text across content areas, including domain-specific texts to address key concepts, and understand academic vocabulary related to all instructional units. Based on data analysis, we will focus our 2018-19 efforts on implementing programs that improve overall performance in Writing and Math. We will also create specially designed instruction (SDI) that addresses the diverse learning needs of students in each of our unique populations with a specific focus on raising achievement among our 12:1:4 cohort. Due of the nature of our students, a strong focus on transition and career readiness achievement with embedded writing and math objectives will supplement instruction in core content areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in an Alternate Assessment/Common Core aligned instructional setting at 811K will have access to high quality Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) through well-designed curriculum that foster positive outcomes for students with diverse learning needs, as evidenced by 20% gain from baseline to endpoint on formative assessments and 10% gain on SANDI and FAST assessments. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Cluster Teachers, Administration, School-Based Coach, Technology Education Teachers, Speech Therapists.  Populations addressed: students with multiple disabilities and cognitive delays (12:1:4 and 12:1:1 class ratios) and students with Autism (6:1:1 and 8:1:1 class ratios)  Training on the use of SANDI/FAST assessment and All classroom teachers and cluster teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 analysis of data collected.  Baseline data collected on SANDI/FAST.  Utilization of E-Book technology on Smart Board to implement literacy program.  Utilization of switch adapted E-Books for student participation in reading program.  Utilization of project-based learning in classrooms to address the CCLS.  Real-world application used to address the CCLS math skills.  Development of in-house vocational activities to strengthen CCLS Math and ELA skills.  Development and continuation of in-house vocational activities/training to increase real-world skills development..  Use of small group and independent work during classroom lessons for individualized learning.  Use of routines to integrate ELA and Math skills into daily classroom activities.  Bi-Monthly parent workshops and trainings on assessments and curricula used in school. In PLCs teachers will collaborate weekly to share best practices including modification and scaffolding strategies. Classroom and cluster teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Administrative Cabinet, Teachers, Coach.  Ongoing professional development for school staff addressing CCLS.  Utilization of standards-based rubric to examine student work.  Use of student friendly rubric with next steps for student improvement.  Ongoing professional development on technology use in instructional activities.  Creating and using student daily routines. 5  Weekly common planning time to review and analyze student work and develop action plans for next steps.  PD on designing unit plans based on Unique curriculum/Attainment.  PD and implementation of SANDI/FAST assessment.  Development of individualized goals related to CCLS.   Professional development and implementation of IEP goals aligned to CCLS. Engrade for data analysis connected to SANDI identified goals and learning targets. Professional development on ELA and Math lessons aligned to CCLS and instructional shifts. Number of satisfactory (Developing, Effective, Highly Effective) lessons observed in which there is alignment to CCLS (math/literacy) and instructional shifts. Classroom and cluster teachers Classroom and cluster teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Assistant Principals, School-Based Coach 9/2018- 6/2019 Administrative Cabinet 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Saturday programs will serve as a means to engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home. The administration, teachers, parent coordinator and the parent association will design and implement monthly programs to provide education, support, skill building, and resource sharing opportunities to help parents reinforce specially designed instruction objectives and strategies at home. We engage families in communication about day to day programs and objectives through ClassDojo (available to parents/families) so they can engage in ongoing participation in their students’ education. Family professional development opportunities will commence in November 2018 and conclude in June of 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional supplies and curriculum: We utilize the following curricular resources as supports: Attainment; Focus on STEM; Equals; Social Express, and Unique (including the Transition Passport System). The curriculum team will utilize these resources, along with classroom experience, teacher feedback, data team reports, and research-based practices to create specially designed units of study and curricula that meets the needs of our diverse learning community. Curriculum team will receive per session for after school meetings. We will participate in the SANDI Assessment program, which has a vocational component that support our Transition Linkage Coordinator/Job Developer, along with access to the District 75 Transition Coach. Professional Development: Administrators plan professional development on alignment of Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), Career Development and Occupational Studies (CDOS), and the Danielson Rubric for utilization during formal and informal observations, which will be administered by administrators, key staff, and teachers. The school-based coach and mentoring program will provide additional supports to teachers and staff in ensuring curricula are delivered and modified using best practices to ensure each of our students are receiving specially designed instruction to meet their needs. The school operates on a modified schedule with extended day for teachers 6  on Mondays and Tuesdays for professional development and parent engagement. Teachers will be sent to professional development opportunities offered outside of the school building throughout the school year, and substitute coverage will be provided to accommodate. Monthly weekend professional development opportunities will be offered at training rate to provide additional training on curriculum. School Teams: The data team collects, aggregates, and analyzes school-wide student assessment data from STARS, SANDI/FAST, Engrade, NYSAA, NYSESLAT and Class Dojo programs along with anecdotal data. This data is used to identify trends and make ongoing adjustments to the curriculum as necessary in order to ensure the best possible instruction and student outcomes. Data team will receive per session for after school meetings. Key Allies: Supplemental programming will be provided through grants and outside organizations to ensure that our students are receiving well-rounded and engaging instruction to support their core learning. Partnerships, programs, and grants include: Marquis Studio’s arts education programming; the Morgan Library & Museum’s Morgan Book Project; and Urban Advantage’s community-based learning opportunities. Classes also engage in community-based learning opportunities throughout the school year. We participate in several District 75 initiatives, including: Math Think Tank; the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) team; life skills computer-based learning program 3D World; and other annual or ongoing D75 initiatives. We also offer several after school programs, which include: Middle School After School, which provides supplemental instruction in all core content areas; CHAMPS, which provides opportunities for students to develop team-building skills and establish lifelong fitness habits; and a career readiness program provided by AHRC. Teachers and paraprofessionals will receive per session for after school programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, students will demonstrate a 15% gain from baseline to endpoint on formative assessments as recorded in Engrade and will demonstrate an 8% increase in writing and math skills as evidenced by correlating progress in formative assessments based on SANDI flagged IEP goals in the respective areas of the curriculum. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The Data team will use formative assessments based on SANDI-flagged IEP goals in the respective areas of the curriculum (i.e. Pre- and Post-testing), SANDI/FAST student performances in SANDI Fall 2018, FAST Benchmark 1 Fall 2018, FAST Benchmark 2 Spring 2019, and SANDI Spring 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Connie Lekas School utilizes Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) as a school-wide behavior and supportive intervention for students, affording them opportunities to aspire to their full potential. PBIS is an intervention and guidance strategy that acknowledges student behavior, and identifies ways to intrinsically motivate students to continue their success. Students earn rewards/points by exhibiting expected behaviors according to our PBIS matrix. The Connie Lekas School utilizes ClassDojo as the primary classroom/behavior management tool to support the targeted behaviors in the PBIS S.T.A.R.S. matrix. ClassDojo is an interactive, online behavior management and parent engagement/ communication website that engages students and parents in the behavioral progress of students throughout the school day. Students work with teachers to earn points by displaying the targeted behavioral expectations in accordance to class rules and the S.T.A.R.S. matrix. Parents are able to sign onto ClassDojo to communicate directly with teachers, see images and videos of posted classroom activities/projects and to monitor student progress towards points earned; accomplishments; and areas of needed improvement. Dojo points can be converted to "Connie Lekas Bucks" which can be redeemed at the Connie Lekas school store for a variety of items. This method of positive reinforcement affects a positive school culture through an increased sense of accomplishment and pride. 811K has a very active student council and self-advocacy group that work towards spreading awareness about positive behaviors and becoming an advocate for social response and active members of the community post-graduation. 811K will continue to create and provide learning activities specifically targeting bullying behaviors including cyber-bullying while utilizing the Respect For All curriculum. Data sources: PBIS data, School-wide Information System (SWIS) data, and Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) report data. Additionally, the Connie Lekas School utilizes Get Ready to Learn (GRTL), the first researched developmental yoga program. GRTL is a yoga therapy program which is used to prepare students to be in optimal physical, emotional and cognitive states for learning. It also creates a learning environment where students are calm, safe and comfortable. Analysis of SWIS Data for Office Referrals by Students with at least 2 referrals for 2017-18, shows that 46% of referrals comes from the 12:1:1 cohort; 17% comes from the 12:1:4 cohort; 29% comes from the 6:1:1 cohort; and 8% comes from the 8:1:1 cohort. However, the 6:1:1 cohort comprised 50% of the top 10, which is an increase of 40% from last year, while the 12:1:1 cohort represented 30% of the top 10, which is a decrease of 20% from the previous year. This significant shift may be due to a higher fidelity of reporting in the 6:1:1 cohort as opposed to the other cohorts, but may also be due to new students who are unfamiliar with our behavioral interventions, since the top three students are all middle school 6:1:1 students. As a result, greater focus will be placed on both the 6:1:1 and 12:1:1 cohorts with regards to decreasing the number of referrals from these cohorts, while learning from the success of other cohorts. We can continue to monitor this by 8  analyzing the positive behavior points earned, by those students in the top 10, within ClassDojo over the course of the school year. According to the School Year (SY) 2017-18 end of year summary report on OORS data, we experienced tremendous success with level 4 OORS infractions, as evidenced by an overall 66% decrease from SY 2016-17. However, in SY 2017-18, we also experienced a 200% increase in level 5 OORS infractions as compared to the previous year. Thus, we have identified a need to focus on decreasing all levels of OORS infractions in SY 2017-18 by increasing staff training in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI) to promote environmental awareness, cultural responsiveness, and social emotional supports across school and community-based contexts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 811K will provide a safe and supportive environment for all students through reinforcement of PBIS structures and increased staff training in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI) to promote environmental awareness, cultural responsiveness, and social emotional supports across school and community-based contexts, as evidenced by a 20% reduction in OORS incidents across all levels of concern. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? TCI training for teachers and paraprofessionals All Students 9/2018- 6/2019 Dean (PBIS Coach) Structured school wide PBIS, ClassDojo School Clubs / Student Advocacy Project Attainment - Social Skill Training program Get Ready to Learn (GRTL) OORS and SWIS data collection and analysis The needs of ENLs will be addressed through Arts grants and Title III. All students 9/2018- 6/2019 ENL Department NA NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement NA NA NA NA NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent involvement will be facilitated through Title III, PA activities, ongoing parent support through related service provider workshops, and Classroom Dojo are means by which the school will engage families and support their understanding of the Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home. The ENL Department, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association will be key personnel responsible for implementing and overseeing activities in this framework area commencing with activities from November 2018 to June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PBIS professional development, cyber-bullying materials (Attainment curriculum resources), TCI training and instructional resources. Class Dojo professional development as well as supports from the PBIS/Crisis Intervention Team. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 0  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 811K will provide a safe and supportive environment for all students through reinforcement of PBIS structures and increased staff training in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI) to promote environmental awareness, cultural responsiveness, and social emotional supports across school and community-based contexts, as evidenced by a 10% reduction in OORS incidents across all levels of concern. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reports to monitor OORS infractions, ClassDojo to monitor student behavioral points earned and areas that need improvement along with levels of parental engagement. SWIS referral and GRTL reports to assess and monitor decreased behaviors during instructional time. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers have been successfully evaluated by the Danielson Framework for Teaching and instructional activities have shown great achievement with the use of the framework. Teachers collaborated to design and implement a well-aligned standards-based curriculum to improve student achievement. During common administrative periods, teachers agreed on effective and coherent instructional strategies and have implemented these in their classrooms. According to the School Quality Survey, 66% percent of 811K teachers agreed overall that their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools. Additionally, teachers are eager to share/discuss new ideas and best practices of instruction with other teachers. 91% of teachers believe there are opportunities to work productively with colleagues in the school, and 85% percent of teachers think there is ample time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. Inter-visitations have strategically become a part of pedagogical best practices for the last four years amongst all cohorts. All teachers participated in at least one inter-visitation last year. This professional activity will increase to at least two inter-visitations with one in the Fall semester and the second in the Spring semester. Collaboration that includes inter-visitation and sharing of ideas within 811K, and other school programs ensures best practices are effective and coherent across all classrooms/cohorts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 811K will promote ongoing opportunities for inter-visitation, cohort and cross-cohort collaborations to ensure fluidity of instructional and structural supports to meet the academic, behavioral and social needs of all students, as evidenced by 80% of instructional staff participating in collaborative professional learning (PL) and 100% of teachers participating in Professional Learning Communities (PLC). 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Review of inter-visitation protocol and adaptation to meet the needs of our school. All teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Teacher Leaders and Administration Professional development on key areas of inter visitation PLC to discuss inter-visitation protocol Implementation of modified inter - visitation protocol All teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Teacher Leaders and Administration Teachers participating in the inquiry process (driven through the instructional focus) during professional learning communities regarding inter-visitations and best practices across classrooms. All teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Teacher Leaders and Administration N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parental involvement will be fostered through the use of parent-teacher anecdotes about teacher inter-visitation. Class parent newsletters will share information about classroom visits. Teacher leaders, the Parent Coordinator and the Administration will be key personnel responsible for implementing and overseeing activities in this framework area commencing with activities from November 2018 to June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional resources, schedule adjustments, professional development on Mondays extended day to practice the use of the protocol. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 3  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded X In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, 811K will promote ongoing opportunities for inter-visitation, cohort and cross-cohort collaborations to ensure fluidity of instructional and structural supports to meet the academic, behavioral and social needs of all students, as evidenced by 60% of instructional staff participating in collaborative professional learning (PL) and 80% of teachers participating in Professional Learning Communities (PLC). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by data analysis from feedback form/questionnaire about teacher participation. Tools and instruments of measure to be used are Google Docs, Feedback Form/ Questionnaire and Microsoft 365 by the end of February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2017-2018 academic year, 811K staff participated in numerous Professional Development opportunities. These Professional Development presentations were conducted on site during team meetings and on Mondays during professional development time, according to our re-purposed day. Further, staff members attended professional development at district level by choosing to sign up for self-directed learning opportunities on the District 75 Professional Development website. As a result, team leaders from cohorts were created and these team leaders were able to turnkey information to colleagues in areas of effective instruction practices to support our students’ various needs. 811K continued to use Attainment, Unique, and Equals curricula to improve students’ academic outcomes. Formative and Summative assessments including SANDI and FAST were used to track student progress towards achievement. The Principal met weekly with the cabinet and monthly with faculty to review progress, evaluate, make decisions, and monitor instructional quality. According to the School Quality Survey, 94% of teachers indicate that the principal makes clear to the staff her expectations for meeting instructional goals, 91% responded that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they learned in professional development 77% of those surveyed indicated that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across the different grade levels at this school. There is consistency in curriculum, instruction, and learning materials among teachers in the same level at this school. However, there remains a need for more teachers to participate in the inquiry process as shared leaders and to provide more professional development opportunities. Based on teacher feedback, 66% of teachers participated in inter-visitations during the school year. The school leaders proposed a Professional Learning Community (PLC) structure to facilitate these professional learning opportunities throughout the school week. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 811K will expand the transition planning process through the development of increased opportunities for students to engage in community-awareness activities, college access programs, and work-based learning experiences to maximize college and career readiness, independent living and post-secondary options, as evidenced by 50% of students having an active transition portfolio that explicitly captures evidence of students’ completed steps to achieving individual transition goals. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers meet weekly in PLC with a focus on addressing strategies for student engagement and assessment. Protocols and team norms to include teacher communication will be implemented. All teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Administrative Cabinet Implementation of school-wide Professional Development plan All teachers Lead teachers/facilitators provide Professional Development in PLC meetings driven through self-directed learning/tuning student work/aggregating data. All teachers Development of a school-wide Professional Development plan for Mondays, Chancellor's Conference days, and teachers sent to out-of-building for Professional Development to turnkey information to colleagues. All teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 9/2018- 6/2019 9/2018- 6/2019 Administrative Cabinet Administrative Cabinet All Teachers Administrative Cabinet The PLC Lead facilitators meet monthly to review feedback from colleagues in their cohort. PLC Lead 9/2018- 6/2019 PLC Lead Facilitators Administrative Cabinet will meet once per month to discuss needs and monitor next steps. Administrative Cabinet 9/2018- 6/2019 Facilitators Administrative Cabinet Administrative Cabinet Key parent leaders will be invited to meetings. Development of individual teacher Professional Development portfolios All teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Administrative Cabinet 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parental involvement is fostered through the implementation of Parent Professional Development opportunities. Additionally, key parent leaders are involved in the School Leadership Team. The Administrative Cabinet and Parent Coordinator will be responsible for implementing and overseeing activities in this framework area commencing with activities from November 2018 to June 2019. 6  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments, instructional resources, professional development for PLC lead facilitators, time on Tuesday extended day for PLC lead facilitators to meet once monthly. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 811K will expand the transition planning process through the development of increased opportunities for students to engage in community-awareness activities, college access programs, and work-based learning experiences to maximize college and career readiness, independent living and post-secondary options, as evidenced by 40% of students having an active transition portfolio that explicitly captures evidence of students’ completed steps to achieving individual transition goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PLC Feedback Questionnaire, logs and minutes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school’s Parent Coordinator works with parents and parent groups to implement activities. There is an open-door policy where parents are welcomed to visit the school and participate in all activities. The school Parent-Teacher Association/Parent Association (PTA/PA) coordinates activities for graduation, parent open house and in class activities. The school hosts a curriculum fair to collaborate with parents about instructional activities and materials. This allows parents to participate in establishing the instructional focus and to have a voice in shaping their child’s education. Our school has strong community ties. Through these ties we have developed multiple work-sites where students can develop career readiness skills. The community also participates by contributing to graduation and other school projects. According to our school survey, parents say that 97% of teachers communicate regularly with them. 94% of the respondents indicated that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school. Of the parents/families who responded, 91% of parents participated in a parent/teacher conference or meeting and 97% percent of parents say that teachers try to understand their families’ problems and concerns. According to the school quality survey, only 61% of parents volunteer at the school. However, 84% of the respondents indicated that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. Since November 2015, ClassDojo, an interactive, online behavior tracking website that engages students and parents in their behavioral progress during the school day was implemented. This initiative began with 3 parents and the most recent aggregated data indicates that 104 parents are enrolled on ClassDojo, which is a significant increase in parent involvement from the inception of parental involvement through technology. Parents are supportive through this implementation and have the opportunity to increase communication with teachers. Parents are able to monitor the success of students as it relates to behavior management in the learning environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 811K will increase student outcomes through specified collaborative events between families and stakeholders as evidenced by 5% in students moving to less intensive services and supports or less restrictive environments. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Messenger System and notices in every language will remind parents about monthly meetings. Announcements from assistant principals will tell parents about the curriculum being used for the month. Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator and the PA will implement a program on Saturdays for parents and students to attend on a monthly basis to provide an opportunity of support. Parents and students 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers will send home a monthly newsletter about past and upcoming events as well as the curriculum being used for the month. Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, PA Teachers Administration and Teachers will monitor and update the school website to ensure all of the stakeholders have access to the information. Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 Administration and Teachers Teachers will use Classroom Dojo to communicate directly with parents and provide real time information about student performance in academics and behavior. Parents and students 9/2018- 6/2019 Administration and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent newsletters and a voice messaging system will promote more consistent communication by keeping parents informed about news and events in the school community. Further, we will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to increase their achievement levels at home. Coordinate schedule with key personnel to implement workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, teachers, students, parent coordinator, school messenger, school website, professional development for ClassDojo and implementation of structure in all classrooms. There will be ongoing partnership with Parent/Guardian to address areas of concern. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 9  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 811K will increase student outcomes through specified collaborative events between families and stakeholders as evidenced by 2% in students moving to less intensive services and supports or less restrictive environments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Number of parents connected to ClassDojo, PTA Meeting sign-in sheets, Attendance sign-in sheets for various events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in Level 1/2 Mathematics Students in Level 1/2 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small groups During the school day After-School Program Small groups During the school day AfterSchool Program Attainment Core Curriculum Solution: Writing With Purpose utilizesthinking skills as a foundation for successful writing. Students are supportedwith graphic organizers and writing frames aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Study Island, an online interactive website used for student achievement to literacy. Attainment Core Curriculum Solution: Math, aligned to CCLS,focuses and expands the concepts wherein studentslearn math in community, home, workand leisure activities. Students engage inDrill Exercises to build fact and operational skills as well as calculator skills, money 1  Science Students in Level 1/2 Social Studies Students in Level 1/2 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students in Tier 2 with at-risk behaviors and Tier 3 with high at-risk behaviors exchange skills, logic, geometry and spatial sense; Thinking Maps and Boardmaker Symbols: to connect reading to writing and assists students with comprehension of content. Science Intervention Strategies through the use of Discovery Education. News-2-You: A leveled online newspaper utilizing picture symbols and words to address social studies lessons. Additionally, Attainment Core Curriculum exploring American History. Social Studies Intervention Strategies Social Stories: small narratives created to better understand social-emotional issues Small groups During the school day Small groups During the school day Small groups; one-on-one instruction During the school day 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 6  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P 811K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P811K will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, 8  and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I-participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; 9  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g. quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their 0  children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC)) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P811K, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 1  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor 2  their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 3  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to l learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P811K, The Connie Lekas School, is a school for students with multiple disabilities; we service students from grade 6 through 12. The classes are comprised of students from four classroom ratios. Those ratios are: 12:1:1 (students with moderate cognitive and possible physical delays), 12:1:4 (students with severe to profound multiple disabilities including cognitive, physical and social emotional delays), 6:1:1 and 8:1:1 (students that fall under the Autistic spectrum, who have communication and social emotional delays), within our main site. The school hours are from 8:00 am to 3:40 pm on Mondays, 8:00 am to 3:30 pm on Tuesdays and 8:00 am to 2:20 pm from Wednesdays through Fridays. Administrators’ hours are between 7:00am and 3:30pm on Mondays through Fridays. On extended days and in addition to several after school programs during the week and on weekends, administrators are on duty. Connie Lekas School currently has a total of 337 students. Of those students, about 106 are English Language Learners (ELLs), which is a 30% representation of our student population. Our ELL program consists of one (1) bilingual Spanish self-contained class, two 12:1:4 ENL self-contained classrooms and one pull out ENL teacher. The ENL teacher teaches in both the stand alone and integrated program as per CR Part 154. Our program utilizes the following ENL methodologies: TPR (Total Physical Response), CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach), the Language Experience Approach and The Natural Approach. During instruction, the following strategies are used: graphic organizers, Mayer Johnson picture symbols, programmatic augmentative voice out-put devices, access devices to explore the curriculum, flow charts, experience charts, and KWL charts. The lessons are differentiated to address each students learning style while working on their IEP goals. We service students who are Alternate Placement and are taught by Special Education/ENL Teachers, using ENL methodologies. In order to support our ELLs, P811K will offer a Title III Saturday Academy Program to enhance literacy through cultural studies. The program will be based on an exploration of our students’ culture as it relates to Music and Arts. Twelve (12) students will be selected and they will examine the origin of the music of their culture, dance and (with the help and input from their parents) will perform music and dance from their culture as well as their liking as a culminating activity. The Saturday Academy will meet for three (3) hours on a Saturday, for six (6) weeks from 10 AM to 1 PM. Parents will be encouraged to participate in every session. The program is scheduled to begin in March 2019 and run through the first week in May 2019 (excluding holidays and pending approval). The culminating event (included in the six weeks) will be held on the first Saturday in May 2019, from 10 am to 1pm for the Saturday Academy, which will be a part of our Family Arts Events taking place between the hours of 10am and 3pm. During the Family Arts celebration, the Saturday Academy participants will engage in a performance celebrating Music and Costumes from Around the World as part of our school's Family Engagement Activities. Last year, students from the 6:1:1, 12:1:1 and 12:1:4 program were the ones who participated in the Title III program; the same is intended this school year. The twelve (12) students who will be selected will be those who are in the Entering level of the English language proficiency and 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information whose NYSESLAT scores are invalid. These students come from a variety of cultural and linguistic backgrounds. All students from each cohort will be invited to apply and the first 12 who apply and show interest will be selected. Students are selected based on their timely response, in addition to a represented selection of home languages. These students will be supported by six (6) paraprofessionals who will be compatible to the students’ native language and able to support their needs using all ENL methodologies. The program will be scaffolded to provide supplemental instruction. Students will be using literacy, technology, and visual arts, leading to a music festival. The program will end in a celebratory atmosphere and parents will be asked to take part in the cultural performance. Every parent and student will receive a T-shirt at the end of the program with the picture of the student and parent imprinted. The instruction will be delivered in English to the students who receive ELL services by two ENL certified teachers, one Music teacher and six (6) paraprofessionals (who will be selected based on the needs of the students attending the program – one (1) classroom paraprofessional and one (1) for Health/Crises needs). Each class consists of one teacher and two paraprofessionals. An additional two (2) paraprofessional are on board to support the Music teacher. The music teacher will be able to provide project- based learning with a hands on approach to the exploration of music and culture. All postings are listed and shared in the school community for 20 days. The program will focus on supporting students’ acquisition of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English, integrating technology and in reinforcing students’ language skills through: 1) participation in music activities from cultures around the world, 2) research of musical cultures, and 3) application of safe practices and choices in their daily lives. Parents will be encouraged to participate during the Saturday sessions. Students will present an international/multicultural musical performance creating their own performances using instruments, posters and songs found. In addition to music instruction provided by the Music teacher, participants will be able to use the Karaoke machine as a support to music and dance during their performances at the culminating “Music Around the World” presentation. Parents and students will wear the imprinted t-shirts and cultural costumes on the day of the performance. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III Saturday Academy program is a supplemental language instruction program for English Language learners with an alternative assessment IEP mandate. It will focus on Music (including music instruction), Culture and Arts. The theme for the program is "Music and Cultural at 811K". Additionally the Academy will focus on supporting students’ acquisition of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English, integrating technology and music instruction while reinforcing students’ language skills through: 1) participation in research of musical activities from various cultures around the world as well as 2) the application of safe practices and choices in their daily lives. The Administrator, two ENL teachers, one music teacher along with the six paraprofessionals will participate in professional development (PD) for two Saturdays, prior to the start of the 7  Part C: Professional Development program from 9am to 12pm. The first two hours for these two Saturdays (for the teachers and paraprofessionals) are budgeted in this plan and the additional hour is budgeted as a supplement in the Immigrant Fund Plan for these two Saturdays. The three hours per each of the two days for PD is budgeted in this plan for the Administrator. Professional development for the continuing six weeks will take place from 9am to 10am (budgeted in the supplemental plan) with instruction to follow from 10am to 1pm (budgeted for in this Plan). The Immigrant Funds Supplemental Program will help to offset the ongoing 1 hour professional development for the Administrator for the latter six weeks and for the entire duration of eight weeks for the teachers and paraprofessionals. PDs will begin in March 2019. Staff will be trained in musical instruction, the operation and use of the Karaoke machine, Ipad music programs and software (using Smartboard). The trainings will strategically focus on research and the exploration of students’ culture in relationship to cultural music, costumes and art. Staff will be trained on strategies and incorporation of technology and instructional tools and materials related to topics focused on music and culture from around the world. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Following the distribution of the official Title III letter, we will have our ELL staff backpack a letter as well as call the parents (if needed) and inform them of their child's opportunity to participate in our Saturday Academy program. We will inform parents of this opportunity in their native languages. Parents will have an opportunity to engage in hands on learning and understanding of their children’s academic progress (examining student work, PBIS matrix/STARS system, parent’s guide to use of augmentative communication devices. Parents having been notified of their child's selection will be invited to participate in a parent/student orientation during the first session of the Saturday Academy. The orientation will be facilitated by Adunnola Waterman French, Assistant Principal along with the support of our ENL teachers, music teacher and paraprofessionals with a focus on culture, music, dance and the arts. Invited family members (parents/guardians) of students selected will be introduced to the Title III plan and the importance of the supplemental program for our English Language Learners. They will be informed of the six (6) working Saturday sessions and the one culminating performance Saturday session (included in the six sessions), which coincides with our Family Arts Day. Additionally, family members who participate will have an opportunity to be involved, work and learn along-side their children. Throughout the program students and families will be engaging in multicultural music, dance and project based activities, conducting research using the Internet, creating international genre posters, a multicultural calendar of music and cultural activities that students can engage in with their peers and/or parents. Every parent and student will receive a T-shirt at the end of the program with the picture of the student, staff and family members imprinted. The school will provide translation services for parents who require them (Title III funds are not used for this purpose). Using ENL methodologies and scaffolds, Parents (along with the help of the ENL teachers and supporting staff) will help students explore music activities and dance activities practiced in 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities various cultures around the world. Lessons will include a spotlight on the language, vocabulary, social expressions, and communicative etiquette, materials and practices needed to ensure safe participation in music and dance. The school will provide the parents and students with metro cards to facilitate their attendance and punctuality so they can attend the orientation and moreover, the program. Based on prior data it was found that music and dance were high interest for both students and family members. As such, this year we have incorporated the teaching practice of our music teacher to provide additional support during the six weeks of instruction. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Subtotal = $1,522.80 Subtotal = $4,002.90 Subtotal = $4,584.36 Subtotal = $317.65 Total: $10,427.71 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. One Administrator: Professional Development 1 x 3 hours x 2 days x $63.45 = $380.70 Instruction including culminating activity 1 x 3 hours x 6 days x $63.45 = $1,142.10 Three Teachers: Professional Development 3 x 2 hours x 2 days x $60.65 = $727.80 Instruction including culminating activity 3 x 3 hours x 6 days x $60.65 = $3,275.10 Six Paraprofessionals: Professional Development 6 x 2 hours x 2 days x $34.73 = $833.52 Instruction including culminating activity 6 x 3 hours x 6 days x $34.73 = $3,750.84 1 Secretary: 1 x 8.5 hours x $37.37 = $317.65 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $0 Purchased services  High quality staff $0 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Instructional Music items (drums, hand cymbals, maracas, tambourines, bells, cartoons for storage, etc) = $726.29 T-Shirts/Transfer Paper = $250 Materials (paper, poster boards, markers, colored pencils, binders, etc) = $250 $0 Round Trip Metro Cards 14 x $5.50 x 6 days (including Culminating Activity Performance Day) = $462 Refreshments for students and families: $250 Grand Total Total: $1,226.29 $0 Total: $462 Total: $250 Grand Total: $12,366.00 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name The Connie Lekas School Borough Brooklyn School Number 811 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Antoinette Rose Coach - ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Margaret Zavaglia, Bilingual Teacher/Subject Area Victoria Ajayi, ENL Teacher/Subject Area - Related-Service Provider Malkie Lipschitz, Speech Superintendent - Assistant Principal Adunnola Waterman French Coach - School Counselor Yuliana Contecha Parent Quissy Ortega Parent Coordinator Donna Donegan Field Support Center Staff Member - Other (Name and Title) - C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 392 Total number of ELLs 105 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.79% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? 811K services students with a multitude of disabilities ranging from moderate cognitive and possible physical delays to severe and profound multiple disabilities including physical and social emotional delays and also students that fall under the Autistic spectrum, who have communication and social emotional delays. Formative Assessments for our students include Teacher Observations and teacher-made assessments based on students IEP goals, Questions and Discussions, End of Unit tests, Exit Slips, Graphic Organizers, Projects Peer/Self Assessments are among the types of formative assessments used at 811K. The data from these assessments consistently measure student progress and growth. They show where the students are and where they need help in their second language acquisition. We use the date to drive our instruction in the classrooms. Teachers meet in professional learning communities to examine student work and student data. In turn, teachers 2  strategically plan lessons and create/modify student groups, creating multiple entry points for as aligned with the school's Instructional Focus and Curriculum Plan. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support the use of formative assessments, tteachers document student progress in Engrade - an online learning and management assessment platform. This data-based system allows teachers and administrators to see student progress on a weekly basis and based on this data teachers are able to pinpoint where the students are and then gear instruction based on student needs. Teachers meet in professional learning communities to examine student work and student data. In turn, teachers strategically plan lessons and create/modify student groups, creating multiple entry points for ELLs as aligned with the school's Instructional Focus and Curriculum Plan. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate our using the data from NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and the SANDI diagnostic and FAST benchmark tests/assessments. We use the yearly scores of the NYSESLAT to assess the literacy skills of the ELLs. Those scores determine the proficiency levels of our ELLs. SANDI (Students Annual Needs Determination Inventory) (diagnostic) – and FAST ((benchmark) are used to assess the early literacy skills of our over four domains (Reading, Writing, Math and Communication). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative assessments when analyzed inform the teaching practice school-wide. Students in need are identified in the process of instruction and those needs are addressed individually. As with formative assessments, data is analyzed and teachers meet in professional learning communities to review data as presented by our Data Team. Teachers are able to strategically plan lesson of instruction, create and modify students groups determined by the data analysed. Additionally, ENL teachers provided both "pull-out" and "push-in" services for our ELLs. Students are placed in an language supported groups. Students whose home language (HL) is not the language of instruction are supported by Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals. Classroom teachers differentiate instructional materials and employ the use of technology. For example, students are able to use Ipad with dual language as support methods. As a school, we also provide support to families through parent professional development and school-wide activities such as Family Arts, Saturday Academy program to equipping parents with skills to support our students in the home environment. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] While our students have severe cognitive deficits as determined by Committee on Special Education, the ELL Data Analysis tool serves as a guide in how we will strategically incorporate learning tools for teachers through both our Curriculum and Data teams. School data currently indicates that 51 out of our 87 NYSESLAT test takes remained at same proficiency levels. Only 4 have advanced 1 proficiency level and 1 that has advanced 2 proficiency levels. Data also indicates that 5 test takes have regressed 1 proficiency levels. As such, our ENL teachers will utilize the information gathered from NYSESLAT data to identify the specific areas of academic needs and collaborate with classroom teachers in the development of IEP goals and planned daily instruction. Additionally, classroom teachers utilize data from SANDI/FAST to inform their lesson planning, instruction and assessment and analysis of students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The ELL Data Analysis tool is used to gather data from the NYSESLAT as it relates to progress and/or regression in language proficiency. The full and Student Summary Report are indicators of the various modalities of need for our students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Based on the NYSESLAT Analysis and Report for our school, we have our professional learning communities in which our ENL teachers are placed in our 12:1:4 Cohort to collaborate both vertically and horizontally. Additionally, findings are disseminated 3  to our Data and Curriculum teams so that a holistic approach is taken with regards to making adjustments in the instructional focus for our ELL students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In accordance with CR Part 154.2, P811K ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency level by scheduling the appropriate number of minutes in the ENL teachers’ Programs. The ENL teachers set up their schedules to service through departmentalized, integrated and stand-alone programs. Students are grouped regardless of grade in addition to heterogeneous groups of mixed proficiency levels (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding). As per CR Part 154-2 (K-8 and 9-12) Transitional Bilingual Education Program, total ENL minutes are 360, 360, 180, 180 minutes per week and 540, 360, 180 minutes per week respectively, in addition to Home Language Arts instruction. Commanding proficiency level students (former ELLs ) continue to receive service for an additional two years after achieving English proficiency in the NYSESLAT. They receive 0.5 units of study per week (90minutes) consisting of 1 unit of ENL/ELA (180 minutes), or other core content area. b. TBE program. If applicable. As indicated previously students receive service from the ENL teachers who use the push-in model for content area instruction. Home Language Arts is taught by the Bilingual teacher. Content area instruction is delivered by both bilingual teacher and the ENL teacher who collaborate to incorporate a balanced literacy instruction in addition to an emphasis on differentiated instruction for through the use of scaffolding techniques, visual aids, deliberate modeling, Total Physical Response and multi-sensory activities, interactive writing,shared reading and read-alouds, etc. Home Language Arts support support is provided by the Bilingual Teacher and bilingual teaching assistants (paraprofessionals) allowing ELLs to access the content. P811K uses a project-based approach that maximizes student interaction and collaboration, targeting oral language development as well as emphasis on our instructional focus of writing, which is crucial for in this developmental stage. c. DL program. If applicable. 811K does not have a dual language program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? By grouping according to NYSESLAT results and proficiency levels, students in each program model engage in and are assessed accordingly. Teachers in their professional learning communities are able to plan, prepare and collect data that tracks growth. For example, in reading and writing, teachers work with support data from their Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) in addition pre and post tests provided in school's curriculum. In speaking and listening, teacher monitor partner work, small and whole group to assess ELLs growth in social and academic language and their vocabulary acquisition. This enables us to follow New York State rules for the specified number of minutes. 4  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Every classroom follows the same curriculum and pacing calendar which are aligned to the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content taught in every classroom using the appropriate modifications necessary to stay in compliance with each students mandates. In our TBE program, students receive instruction in Home Language Arts in addition to the the support of the ENL teacher using the integrated ENL model. The ENL teachers when providing the stand-alone are supported by Alternate Placement paraprofessionals. Our program utilizes the following ENL methodologies: TPR ( Total Physical Response ), CALLA (cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach) , The Language Experience Approach and The Natural Approach. During instruction, the following materials are used: graphic organizers, Mayer Johnson picture symbols, and programmatic augmentative voice out-put devices, access devices to explore the curriculum, flow charts, experience charts, and KWL charts. The lessons are differentiated to address each student’s learning style and entry level while working on their IEP goals. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are formally evaluated using the Sandi and the Fast as well as teacher made tests. We service ELL students with Alternate Placement paraprofessionals that translate the content, who are taught by special education teachers, using ENL methodologies.Currently we have paraprofessionals that speak Russian, Chinese, Haitian-Creole, French, Polish, Albanian, Arabic, Urdu, Cantonese, Mandarin and Spanish. On line libraries are utilized. Books and materials can be read in the students' native languages in order to help increase comprehension. Essential Elements from the NYSAA Standards are used by the teachers when planning for instruction during their professional learning communities meeting. The Bilingual students are assessed in their native language with the help of the Alternate placement paraprofessionals and the Bilingual/ENL teacher with the use of ENL methodologies. Additionally there is a principal review to ensure that the student's academic progress has not been adversely affected by any re-identification process decision. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status To strategically meet the diverse needs of ELLs with the least restrictive environment, all students are taught using our school's standards based curriculum appropriate for their grade based on our project-based learning approach. Teachers meet weekly in professional learning communities to provide uniform grade band (High School, Middle School, Transition) and Cohort (6:1:1, 8:1:1, 12:1:1 and 12:1:4) planning to appropriate curriculum content for our students. Those who are identified as SIFE are either placed in a TBE group or in an ENL instructional group that match their cognitive levels. Students who have a TBE mandate but no program is available are supported by Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals who speak their home language. who have been in the US school system for less than three years (new comers), continue to get support in the TBE program with native language support. Again, students who have a TBE mandate but no program available, Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals are utilized. Units of study is based on students' English proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT. Long term needs are based on the students entry point. If and when our ELLs test proficient, we would continue to service them for two years of their mandated 90 minutes of integrated ENL per week. 811K has never had students that have tested out. We have always supported our students even when they were in transition to get them ready for the work force and the real world. Differentiation is determined by student's entry point and as such teachers utilize varying materials to support students: graphic organizers, Mayer Johnson picture symbols, and programmatic augmentative voice out-put devices, access devices to explore the curriculum, flow charts, experience charts, and KWL charts. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teachers also provide instruction based on the ENL methodologies: TPR ( Total Physical Response ), CALLA (cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach) , The Language Experience Approach and The Natural Approach. The lessons are 5  differentiated to address each student’s learning style and entry level while working on their mandated IEP goals. The program for our is highly effective as a result of the push-in model where ENL teachers are able to work closely with the classroom teachers in meeting the ELLs academic and social needs. Teacher collaboration is school-wide and ENL teachers are a part of the collaboration and planning process. ENL teachers have access to all IEP's, curriculum maps, unit plans, assessments and resources provided by the school so that they are able to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. ENL teachers are able to turn professional development experiences so that classroom teachers are updated with best practices and current ENL research and strategies to use in the classroom. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our schedule's flexibility makes room for our and SWDs to participate in co-curricular activities like culinary arts, music, creative arts, theatre arts and industrial arts in the school workshop. These activities which take place in yet less restrictive environments than the classroom help our students achieve their IEP goals and attain proficiency in the English Language. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Students are provided in-school targeted intervention in ELA and Math and other core content areas. The use of the ELL data analysis tool provides information of students who are "at risk" and the levels ranging from 1 to 7. Our SWDs have severe multiple disabilities and as such adaptation of content for struggling readers and writers is ensured through the used of graphic organizers, outlines, highlighted text, native language texts, etc. A more focus attention is given to those students identified at a "at risk" level 2 or 3 who are at entering and emerging proficiency levels. For students who continue to struggle, more intense interventions are provided.thorough lesson pacing, additional practice activities, adapted assignments and interactive project based activities. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At the time of this writing, no new programs have been identified. We will further improve in our support of ELLs through our Title III Saturday Academy program. Students will participate in an exploration of cultural music which will culminate into a musical extravaganza. Additional curricula have been provided in the areas of STEM. We we continue the use of our mobile science carts to support learning in the classroom this upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our students are afforded the same access to all school programs as their peers. We have two programs in place that are open to all students, including ELLs. Those programs are the AHRC after school, Middle School after school, and CHAMPS. In addition, our ELLs are provided with extended instructional time through the Title III after-school program. Teachers review student performance data on a regular basis and design units of study to meet the diverse needs of students while targeting grade-level/course standards. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELLs are encouraged to participate in all school programs and activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students are supported through the use of augmented communication devices, adapted books, the smart board, Ipads, computers, audio supports, and leveled libraries. Technology is strategically immersed in every classroom. Our curriculum utilizes web-based support from resources such as Ablenet, Attainment, Discovery Education to name a few. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 6  The ENL teachers along with the Bilingual teacher work collaboratively using the collective skills and knowledge of all students including ELLs. Teachers can tap into these valuable language resources that have to promote the students' language development - in English as well as the home language. Classroom with Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals and bilingual paraprofessionals are also instrumental in assessing the needs of the students during the the lessons as students engage in small group work and project based learning. Parental involvement is also key to home language support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. While students are placed in their classrooms according to their age, the support they receive is differentiated according to their academic level and NYSESLAT English Proficiency levels (heterogeneous groups of mixed proficiency levels (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding). We endeavour to place students of the same age and grade range in each group and where this is not achievable we ensure that each group is not more than three years apart in either age or grade or both. With this arrangement both the required services and the resources match the that receive them. All materials are adapted for our students on a daily basis. Books are modified for the students. Lessons are are age-appropriate for the students. We adapt an create books for our students books that are used in regular high schools so that students can experience the same materials as their general education counterparts. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our main site is self-contained. However, in our co-located off sites are supported by ENL teachers of the community school in collaboration with the classroom teachers and teaching assistants. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All are invited to attend Chapter 683 during the summer. Parents of all newly enrolled students are invited to visit the school during the summer program and see all activities and programs that the school offers. Parents meet and are introduced to the Bilingual and ENL staff. Home language surveys are completed. They are made aware of the activities offered at the school. All parents are given the opportunity to determine if the school meets the needs of their child. All students, including ELLs, participate in all activities derived from the curriculum. All ELLs are given the opportunity to participate in all after school programs. Our ELLs receive on-going support all year round. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P811K does not offer a dual language program at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 811K is not a dual language school. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? P811K ensures that all teachers of and non-pedagogic staff have the opportunity to attend professional development workshops in supporting ELLs as the engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. Registrants with the D75 Professional Development Workshops are able to turn-key information through our in-school mandated Monday Professional Development 7  meeting times. Non-pedagogical staff are also provided with the opportunity to attend both internal and external professional development trainings with regards to ELLs support. 811K's professional development plan utilizes whole group (up to 20 participants) and small group (4-5 participants) activities to facilitate share school-wide thinking and discussions about how students learn and how we are able to support the learning of our ELLs. Workshops (not an exhaustive list) include: Reading and Writing the IEP; Instructional planning aligned to school curriculum; Lesson planning for Ells/ELL software and web-based programs; ENL Methodologies, eg. Total Physical Response, CALLA and the Natural Approach; PBIS, etc. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P811K's professional development plan reiterates the administration's strategic decisions to support our instructional goals and meet the learning needs of all our students, including our . Teachers attend at least two external professional development opportunities per year which must include ELL-specific professional development (Jose P., Introduction to ENL Methodologies, Designing Effective Classrooms for ELLs with Disabilities, the Multicultural and Multilingual Classrooms, to name a few). Our school's professional development plan and curriculum plan covers language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for ENL teachers in collaboration with classroom teachers with a focus on teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Workshop attendees for external PD's submit records of attendance such as agendas and more recently copies of any certification received for CTLE credits. Additionally, agendas and sign-in sheets for in-school workshops (both for pedagogues and paraprofessionals) are kept by the school's Data Team. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Each ELL student has a scheduled IEP conference in which parents are invited to attend and at that time ENL goals and progress are discussed. The students ELL teacher is at the meeting informing the parent of the students goals, the progress of their language development and the results of the language proficiency assessments. Prior to that meeting parents are offered translation services, if needed. If translation is needed then a staff member who speaks the language is sought out is asked to translate. If no one in the building speaks the language then The language Translation and interpretation unit is contacted and an interpreter is scheduled to sit at the meeting and interpret for the parent. Our school also offers monthly parent workshops for to discuss goals of the ELL program, provide parents/families with information about understanding language proficiency assessment and the language development needs in content areas. Classroom and ENL teachers are available to parents during the parent involvement time on Tuesday afternoons to meet with parents (face-to-face or via telephone) to discuss individual needs of their ELL student. All materials are provided in the parents'/families' preferred language. Oral interpretation is also available in the preferred language through the use of bilingual staff or the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit when necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL Parents are invited to participate in all school activities. The Parent coordinator schedules a Parent meeting every month. The topics are topics of Parental interest based on the results of a parent survey. The meet and greet is scheduled two times a year so that parents can come and familiarize themselves with their child's teacher, see what their child is doing in school and give input on the educational process of their child. ELL Parents are asked to participate in the Title III program. 8  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. No additional information. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Antoinette Rose, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P811K School DBN: 75K811 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Antoinette Rose Title Principal Adunnola Waterman French Assistant Principal Donna Donegan Parent Coordinator Margaret Zavaglia ENL/Bilingual Teacher Quissy Ortega Parent Victoria Ajayi, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Maryam Kayumova, ENL Teacher/Subject Area - - Coach Coach Yuliana Contecha School Counselor - - - Malkie Lipschitz - - Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/21/2018 09/21/2018 09/21/2018 09/21/2018 09/21/2018 09/21/2018 09/21/2018 - - 09/21/2018 - - 09/21/2018 - - 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75K811 School Name: The Connie LekasSchool Superintendent: Ketler Louissai The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Donna Donegan Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is strategically used when assessing our translation needs (PART III). Based on families responses to two specific questions, "In what language would you like to receive information from the school?" and "On what language would you prefer to communicate orally with school staff?", we are able to ascertain the specific need for written and oral interpretation. In addition, ATS reports POB/Lang (RPOB) and Emergency contact lists (RCON) is analyzed to identify the home languages students use at home. Classroom teachers reach out to families in parent and teacher surveys to ensure that families receive correspondence in their preferred languages. Student Emergency Contact cards/Blue Card Biographical Data are reviewed to identify the preferred language and how they wish to receive notices, when contacting the parent/guardian by telephone, or in a face-to-face meeting. The aforementioned documents are kept in the school's main office. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali (Bangladesh) Chinese (Any) Cantonese English French Fulani Haitian Creole Nepali Punjabi (aka Panjabi) Russian Spanish Tibetan Urdu 8 10 7 0 287 1 0 8 1 2 9 54 1 4 2.04 2.55 1.79 0 73.21 0.26 0 2.04 0.26 0.51 2.3 13.78 0.26 1.02 9 11 2 1 285 0 0 8 1 0 10 54 1 6 2.30 2.81 0.51 0.26 72.7 0 0 2.04 0.26 0 2.55 13.78 0.26 1.53 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Templates of documents related to Parent Teacher Conferences; school events (PA meetings, Transition Fairs); school calendar holidays/school closing notices; monthly school-wide activities; letters from school leadership. Fall and Spring of school year How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In-house bilingual personnel is used to translate documents for backpacking home. Per session funds allocated for this purpose. NYCDOE 3  Title III After School Program January of school year and during the duration of program Translation/Interpretation services used when parents request interpretation and no school based personnel is available. Members of the Language Interpretation team or telephone translations series are used to fulfil oral interpretation during School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings, Parent Association/Town Hall Meetings All notices regarding the Title III After-School program are translated in Parent preferred languages. In-house bilingual personnel is used to translate documents for backpacking home. Per session funds allocated for this purpose. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Citywide centrally-scheduled Parent Teacher Conferences; September, November, March, May Annual or Triennial Meetings Ongoing Tuesday Parent Engagement; Parent Professional Development Workshops Weekly; Monthly interpretation service(s)? Translation/interpretation services are provided through the service of in-house bilingual personnel. Per-session funds have been set aside for this purpose. NYCDOE Translation/Interpretation services is utilized when parents request interpretation and school-based personnel is unavailable. in addition to translation/interpretation services, language interpretation is provided by language interpretation team or telephone translation services for oral interpretation during these meetings. As mentioned previously, in-house personnel and the language interpretation 4  team are used when requested during these face-to-face meetings. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, the language translation team, in-house bilingual staff will be strategically dispatched with directions in reaching limited-English-proficient families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the school year during our Chancellor's Conference Day , staff members are strategically engaged in professional development regarding Chancellor's Regulations. Additionally, our School's Handbook- detailing all policies and regulations- is distributed during our Conference Day. Information is provided to staff members regarding how to contact Language Line Solutions and the Translation and Interpretation Unit through training, email and printouts placed in their mailboxes. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All notifications to parents will be translated, as needed, by school staff. Any language not accommodated will be sent to the Language Translation and Interpretation unit for translation. Verbal emergency services will be met using the Language Translation and Interpretation unit over the phone. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to foster healthy family engagement best practices, 811K will provide surveys for parental feedback regarding language translation services. We will make every effort to consistently seek feedback from parents to ensure that they have access to the school community and that they are being supported. Our data team will begin to analyze data from our surveys, particularly those from our parent events and activities, thereby using as a means of informing and enhancing the work towards our school wide goal of parent/family engagement. An end of year survey will be 5  given to parents and will be analyzed and presented during our End of Year Planning Retreat as we plan for the new school year. 6 
