 02M033 School Name: P.S. 033 CHELSEA PREP Principal: CINDY WANG   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 33 – Chelsea Prep 310200010033 PK - 5 School Number (DBN): 02M033 281 9 th Avenue, New York, NY 10001 212-244-6426 212-629-6893 Phone Number: Fax: Cindy Wang cwang@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Cindy Wang Cristina Tur Jennifer Puritz Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Cindy Wang Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 02 Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue, NY, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356-3815 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7th Avenue, New York, NY YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (212)356-7564 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cindy Wang Cristina Tur Jennifer Puritz Not Applicable/None Not Applicable/None Not Applicable/None Not Applicable/None *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) No Applicable/None CBO Representative, if applicable Rocio Sorribas KarleneFoster Member/ Second Grade Teacher Member/Third Grade Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) GerrieHarvey Cynthia Cervantes Andrea Francis Shannon Mulvihill Member/ Kindergarten Teacher Member/Parent of Student Grade Member/Parent of Student Grade 3, 5 Member/Parent of Student Grade 4 Member/ Parent of Student Grade 1, 2 Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We believe all children learn differently. Students learn best when they are aware of their own learning needs and are actively engaged in their learning, so becoming autonomous learners. We support students in taking responsibility for their learning and giving them the confidence to work at and beyond their zone of proximal development.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Chelsea Prep is proud to have numerous partnerships and collaborations with community based and cultural institutions including the Whitney Museum, Intrepid, Rubin Museum, Impact Coaching, Google, Third Street Music School, NYU Child Study, Highline, City Bees and Peas, TADA, Atlantic Theater, Wild Bird Fund, Audubon Society, and the National Dance Institute. The Chelsea Prep Community of scholars is focused on student achievement and making advances in the fields of sustainability, science, academics, and the arts. Across classrooms, students are engaged in inquiry based activities that are differentiated. Students are motivated to learn as their interests and needs are being addressed in intellectual ways. Across classrooms, there are student led conferences, book clubs, grand conversations, and Socratic seminars that support student autonomy in the classroom. Teachers routinely scaffold instruction to strategically ensure effective entry points for all learners. Students are provided with tailored materials such as tiered vocabulary lists and graphic organizers to work through their tasks. Students are expected to articulate the reasoning for their answers. For example, mathematics is presented as authentic problem solving experiences with students applying their knowledge to real world problem solving. Students are engaged in a meaningful process of solving mathematical problems rather than just formulating the correct answer. Math teaching is based on research that states critical thinking, analyzing and communicating about thinking processes will result in excellence in student performance. With high standards in each classroom and a motivating, aligned curriculum, we have seen growth in student achievement. School stakeholders share the vision that Chelsea Prep’s positive school wide culture celebrates learning. Further, we strive to meet the social-emotional needs of every student to ensure college and career readiness. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Chelsea Prep is a very diverse school with 25% Asian, 25% Caucasian, 31% Hispanic, 12% African American, <1% Native American, and 6% Multi-racial students. In school year 17-18, the school had an increase in students in temporary housing. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. For the last two years, we have heavily invested in professional development (Collaborative Teachers) for teachers to further strengthen our curriculum and instruction (Rigorous Instruction). We have also made strides in expanding our family-community ties through events such as Family Math Night have opportunities everyone have access to same opportunities 0  We want all of our children to have equal opportunity to academic and cultural excellence; and for them to learn and grow in a supportive environment. We will continue to deepen our instructional focus and social emotional curriculum supports in order the close the achievement gap. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M033 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 650 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 26 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 48.0% % Attendance Rate 44.9% % Reduced Lunch 4.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 28.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 22.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 67.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 84% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 10 10 93.1% 2.3% 15.5% 18.0% 22.6% 8.3% 2 6% 6.3 64.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES N/A N/A YES NO YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In past year, we have made great strides in increasing the rigor of our instruction. As a school community, we have embraced the Danielson Framework for Teaching. The Framework, along with the CCLS instructional shifts have served as guideposts to build cohesiveness around our instructional focus, student autonomy, to promote student choice and accountability.  Workshop Model: Throughout the school, we utilize the workshop model, which facilitates small focused group work as well as individual conferences.  Accountable Talk: Across grades, teachers use “accountable talk” which allows all the opportunity to participate, by restating what a peer has said or by synthesizing what others have said into a new idea. Accountable talk holds students accountable in three major areas: o Accountability to the learning community is about how students talk to and with each other. When they speak, they speak loudly and clearly so everyone can hear. When students listen, they do not simply think about what they will say next. They focus on classmates' contributions so they can understand, challenge, build upon, and refine each other’s ideas. As well, students respectfully agree and disagree with their classmates to further discussions. o Accountability to accurate knowledge is about what students discuss. Students make claims and try to be as specific and accurate as possible, drawing in their background knowledge and/or using text evidence. Students hold one another accountable by asking clarifying and challenging questions such as: “Where did you see that in the text?” o Accountability to rigorous thinking is about using the accurate knowledge to build a logical and coherent line of argument. Students use sound reasoning, as well as evidence, to back up their thoughts. You might hear questions like, "Why do you think that?" Or, "What's your reasoning behind that explanation?" These three accountability sets the foundation for a rich classroom culture that promotes learning and student autonomy.  Teacher Assistants: Teacher Assistants are in Grades K-3 classrooms and are there to support students as the teacher directs and the teacher to student ratio supports small group instruction.  Teachers collaborate on multiple levels, work on in teams to share best practices and participate in vertical planning to align curriculum, pedagogy and assessments. o Responsive teaching--address SEL of students on the grade o Addressing students needs such as ESL, speech and SETSS, clusters, planning, and co-teaching to address individualize needs.  Teacher Leadership--our teachers have participated in Teacher Leadership Program (TLP) and other various teacher leadership positions in order to further enhance practices at the school  Mentorships, learning walks, intervisitations, 3  Instructional practices that promote high levels of student thinking and participation  Book Clubs: Book clubs are designed to encourage active participation, discussion and analysis of texts.  Teacher Teams Promote Student Choice and Flexibility: Teachers believe that student choice plays a critical role in developing autonomous students. When planning a unit of study, teachers gather and create checklists for students to keep track of their learning. At PS33, we understand and embrace that all students learn differently and at a different pace. For instance, during reading and writing workshop, students may be working off a checklist, setting a goal for him or herself for that lesson. Checklists are directly tied to end of unit rubrics and are written in a way that students understand their own goals. As well, students often set goals in literacy that are named by the child, given the scaffold provided by the teacher. By providing checklists for students to set goals, students are able to best self monitor to achieve our instructional focus, student autonomy. Through conferences and small group instruction, students have a strong understanding of their goals, internalize them and feel empowered to strive for success.  All our mathematics instruction is structured in a workshop model as we believe students learn by doing. Across classrooms, students are carefully assessed and grouped according to their needs and provided with targeted instruction in station teaching and flexible grouping. While we continue to make strides in promoting student to student discussions and have seen evidence of progress in literacy, we noticed students struggling in the mathematical practices, particularly in solving multi-step word problems and articulating connections based on arguments and reasoning of others. To further enhance the numerical reasoning and strengthen accuracy, efficiency and flexibility, we introduced Number Talks as a daily routine to all K-5 teachers in May 2016. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Annual Goal: B By June 2018, 100% of teaching staff will work in grade teams to look at student work and assessments across the curriculum to plan for targeted and differentiated small group instruction for all students, and will engage in collaboratively planned professional learning to deepen their understanding and strengthen their practice, resulting in improvement of practice in school created teacher reflection/survey. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). At least 10 days of on-site Professional Development from Teacher College Reading and Writing Project. Staff developer will support teachers unpacking units of studies, review student work and data to inform their whole-class/small-group lessons as well as individual conferences. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2017- June 2018 Grade Leaders Vertical Team Utilize grade team leaders who will work with grade teams to norm assessment practices, review periodic student data/work to establish next area of focus. Grade Leaders Staff will review DOE data reports and determine priority focus and student subgroups for additional tiered instructions. All Teacher Attendance of workshops and summer institutes at TC Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal Assistant Principal Assistant Principal Assistant Principal PD Committee Principal September 2017-June 2018 September 2017-June 2018 July 2017-June 2018 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Newsletters, Monthly Learn w Your Child (Fridays), Monthly Publishing Celebrations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Professional Development Package, Per Diem for PD, Consultants for Planning, Per Session as needed Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. TBD Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) On-demands, periodic assessments, Running Records, Student writing w rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Chelsea Prep cultivates a respectful culture for all constituents, where students are known individually and high levels of support foster students’ social, emotional, and academic development. This is evidenced in the last School Quality Review. Higher order thinking is emphasized across grades and content areas via questioning, which is embedded in learning activities across the curricula. The Chelsea Prep community identifies building student autonomy as our instructional focus. Teaching practices across classrooms promote high levels of thinking, provide multiple entry points for all learners, and further align to our school wide belief in developing college and career readiness in all students. Strong beliefs about how students learn best are consistent across classrooms. Classroom learning environments at all grade levels are based on Vygotsky's Theory of Development that pushes students out of their comfort zone and challenges them to engage in tasks of higher difficulty. Teacher teams discuss ways that students can independently self-reflect and set goals in alignment with the school's focus on student engagement and autonomy utilizing the Danielson framework. PS 33 uses CASEL (Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning) to advancing the development of academic, social and emotional competence for all students. The five interrelated sets of cognitive, affective, and behavioral competencies PS 33 believes helps the whole child is: Self-awareness  Self-management  Social awareness   Relationship skills  Responsible decision making In 2016-17, SEL Committee, inspired by our partner, Riley's Way Foundation, selected monthly read-alouds that supported diversity, empathy and kindness. Students in the fourth grade participated in the Citywide Service Summit as their way to make a change in the world. Students in grades 3-5 participated in assemblies facilitated by Riley's Way Youth Council. To further enhance coherence across the school, a school wide behavior plan was developed, which includes outlines processes and protocols that are transparent and consistent across the school. 7  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, four school-wide student activities will be held in order to promote inclusive and supportive community. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Fall & Spring school-wide community building days such as Boosterthon and Field Day Students September 2018 PTA SEL Monthly Committee Meetings SEL Committee Daily/weekly social lessons through responsive classroom Students Lunch time conflict resolution and mediation Students Continue to implement monthly books for all classes to build trust, empathy, and kindness All Staff Utilize recess coaches during lunch time: team building, social support, community and trust experiences All students Implement Choose Love & Sanford Harmony lessons to strengthen students' social emotional learning All teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers & Goldman Sachs (Partner Volunteers) SEL Committee Teachers Guidance Counselor Social Worker SEL Committee Riley's Way E3 Sports Administration June 2019 August 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops for parents, newsletters for parents before/after assemblies to reinforce consistent language between home and school Guidance Counselor; Classroom Teachers 9  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time allocated for planning and running Parent workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monitor against calendar of scheduled events Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TBD Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers create, generate, and manage initiatives that improve the practice across the school. The structures continue at PS 33 as we maintain an institutional knowledge of rigorous systems and practices, which maintain a culture of high expectations and growth in student achievement. PS 33 is a self-motivated community of professionals. Every staff member believes all children can succeed. Each year our school has participated in the Teacher Leadership Program, sending a small group of teachers through the program. Teacher leaders have emerged to spearhead initiatives or offer staff support. Some workshops held by PS 33 include technology integration, low-inference note taking, inter-visitations, and ENL support. Chelsea Prep has always maintained high expectations for every learner, and we have actively been on the path to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Using Hess’ Depth of Knowledge Matrix as guide, we have consistently enriched our curriculum by implanting higher-order thinking skills within each subject area. Each year, our teachers work collaboratively in teams to continue to align, analyze efficacy, and revise these units to meet the CCLS, using Understanding by Design as our planning framework. Over the last several years, teachers have deepened their knowledge of CCLS through careful examination of the NY State Test Samples, analyzing units of study, working together to assess tasks, rubrics, and student work. Our entire faculty has conducted professional learning around the instructional shifts and out of the classroom teachers have worked with grade level teachers to build in relevant curriculum connections. Teachers have worked together to norm expectations, to determine next steps for identified learners and groups of learners, and to identify areas of the unit in need of revision (enrichment or further scaffolding). Teacher Teams & Use of Data within Team In grade teams, teachers use pre-assessment data to determine the priority standards for analysis and ongoing exit tickets are used to determine whole-class lessons and strategy groups for reteach and enrichment. In 15-16 School Year, teachers engaged in cycles of professional development with consultant from Southern Cross Consultancy to unpack updated TC Reading and Writing units. Through the collaboration, teachers added supplemental lessons providing skills that students need based on data. 1  Inter-visitations--Teachers have hosted visits for new teachers and fellow colleagues on concentrated expertise such as writing workshop. Grade teams have also conducted learning walks using protocols such as Ghost Walk to surface consistency of practices and next steps for the school community. In 16-17 School Year, PS 33 became a TCRWP School. Two staff developers work with grade teams in cycles--focused on workshop model, conferring, and small group instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teaching staff will work together to provide a rigorous, vertically-aligned and coherent, standards-based curriculum and diagnostic assessments, as evidenced in a school-wide pacing calendar and assessment framework. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? At least 10 days of math professional development supports for teachers. Teachers July 2018-June 2019 Administration, Math Consultant Teachers will received pacing calendar and guidance on new curriculum program from math consultant. Teachers June 2018-June 2019 Math Consultant During professional development, teachers will engage in planning cycles, revolving around analyzing student work. Rotating cycles will include goal setting, looking at student work, planning instruction, analyzing data and teacher and student reflection. Based off student work, teacher teams adjust instructional practices. Each team will participate in modified lesson-study, led by math consultant. Grade Teams September 2018-June 2018 Grade Leaders, Teacher Leaders, Teacher Teams, All Teachers Grade Teams September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Math Consultant Teacher Teams will participate in 6-8 week cycle of professional learning that is data-driven and results in improvement of teacher practice. All Teachers September 2017-June 2018 PD Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Conduct at least one parent workshop to understand vision and practices in the Fall 2018 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Consultants to support teachers in their collaboration. Time scheduled to accommodate teacher team meetings. Time scheduled for professional learning on Monday extended day. 3  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All teachers will complete a midyear and end of year reflection sheet. By February 2017, all teacher teams will engage in at least one cycle of collaborative inquiry. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher created surveys, student benchmarks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Structures to Support Distributive Leadership There are multiple teams and committees that meet with the administrators to discuss school-wide goals and initiatives. Some key committees and their roles are as follows: Grade Team Leaders--Monthly meeting to facilitate cohesiveness; communication liaison, conversations guided by quality instruction for students Green Committee--Monthly meeting to build more STEM experiences and promote sustainability across the school. Professional Development Committee - Design and plan PD for the staff Measures of Student Learning Committee - PS 33 Data Team School Implementation Team--Meets biweekly to ensure inclusive school community that meets the needs of students with disability/individualized education plan. Quality IEPs professional development is provided along with PDs to support effective multi-tiered behavioral supports. PBIS Committee---Meets monthly to strengthen our school community so there is greater respect amongst our students; establishes clear and consistent behavioral expectations and supports across the school; working to further strengthen social emotional learning for our students so they can be college career ready. Teachers create, generate, and manage initiatives that improve the practices across the school. The structures continue at PS 33 as we maintain an institutional knowledge of rigorous systems and practices, which maintain a culture of high expectations and growth in student achievement. PS 33 is a self-motivated community of 5  professionals. Every staff member believes all children can succeed. Each year our school has participated in the Teacher Leadership Program, sending a small group of teachers through the program. Teacher leaders have emerged to spearhead initiatives or offer staff support. Some workshops held by PS 33 include technology integration, low-inference note taking, inter-visitations, and ENL support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school administration will work with various distributive leadership structures and committees to increase communication, collaboration, and strengthen community, as evidenced by agendas, minutes, and staff surveys. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. o Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Newsletters, Monthly Learn w Your Child (Fridays), Monthly Publishing Celebrations Teachers will be key personnel responsible for implementation Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Consultant, Per Diem, Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Meet monthly with grade leaders and committee leads Meet at least 3x/year with PD Committee Meet at least 3x/year with MOSL Committee to analyze student data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 7  Review of grade team agendas Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We endeavor to deepen family understanding of what “college and career readiness” means to children as well as empower families to support their children in exceeding those expectations. We orchestrate events and opportunities to partner with and engage families in learning:  Monthly Newsletters--PS 33 Website--Learning Links for Families--curriculum resources/websites.Each classroom also has weekly updates that are customized to the progress and learning in each classroom.Teachers also have individual websites.  PS 33 Handbook: The handbook outlines all school protocols and expectations.It is available at all times on the school website  PTA Meetings/PTA E-Blasts--School administration and Parent Coordinator works closely with PTA to provide information on upcoming school events  Class Parents--To further strengthen the communication between school and home, each class has designated class parents that works closely with the Parent Coordinator, PTA and classroom teacher to disseminate information and field constructive feedback to the school.  Monthly Learn w Your Child--First Friday of the month, parents are invited to join learning in the classroom. In addition to reading with their children, parents have also been challenged to conference with their children using the unit-based strategies (as teachers would) during this time.  Coffee & Conversation With Cindy--Parents are invited to monthly intimate conversations with principal to discuss questions and concerns. The feedback provided at these meetings are considered. Plans for change are then detailed and implemented accordingly.  Tuesday Parent Engagement--teachers maximize the usage of weekly Tuesday Parent Engagement Time by working together to publish newsletters, outreach to parents and meeting with families to discuss student progress. This year, the Green Committee instituted Green Tuesdays as a way to involve parents in our sustainability projects. Parents, along with their children, work in classroom to set up and maintain hydroponics systems and work to maintain our school garden. At our recent QR conducted in May 2016, parents shared a desire to have more workshops from one grade to the next to understand the academic programs and ways to support at home. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 9  By June 2019, increase teacher outreach to parents to communicate student progress, as evidence by internal and citywide surveys. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers provide opportunities for parents / guardians to become informed about the curriculum and expectations at Back to School Evening, which takes place at the beginning of the year and through classroom newsletters sent home monthly. Parents September 2018-June 2019 1. Parent Coordinator 2. PTA Classroom celebrations, such as Publishing Parties and Student Showcase Events, to which parents are invited, take place in each classroom at least three to four times per year. Parents learn about the focus of the lesson before the presentation of student learning, are able to provide written feedback in response to student work, and leave understanding the goals and content for the next unit’s celebration. Workshops – flyers and emails are sent out to parents at least 10 days before the meeting. Attendance is recorded. All workshops are held by highly qualified instructors. Workshops including topics related to TCRWP, Math, Science/Technology, Social Emotional Learning. Parents September 2018-June 2019 Parents September 2018-June 2019 3. Consultants 4. Classroom Teachers 1. Classroom Teachers 2. Parent Coordinator 3. Consultants 1. Parent Coordinator 2. PTA 3. Consultants 4. Classroom Teachers Community Building: PTA Meetings, PTA Events (Attendance and Volunteer Rates) Parents Create survey in collaboration w PTA Parents PTA PTA September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 1  Riley's Way Foundation, Hudson Guild, Serious Fun, Chess, McBurney Y Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time to create and disseminate parent information on school community events, such as publishing parties, parent workshops. Time to run events and workshops for parents and school community. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. TBD Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance taken at all of the following events: Back to school nights, Publishing parties, Student Showcase events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ELA State Exam Level 1&2 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Intervention Kits Small Group TC Running Records Mathematics Math State Exam Level 1&2 Tier 1 Small Group Guided Math Diagnostic Assessment (ECAM) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After-school (Gr 1-5), beginning mid-Oct In-school at risk groups, beginning Oct After-school (Gr 1-5), beginning mid-Oct In-school at risk groups, beginning Oct During the day Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Science State Exam Level 1 Level 1 on Unit assessment Bereavement, Divorce, Traumatic Experience Teacher Recommendation FOSS Kits Small Group Trade Books/Non-Fiction Passages As Needed Guided/Small Group During the day As Needed During the day At-risk counseling (NY Psychoanalytical Institute, Bridge to Gap) Small group One-to-one Teacher Consult Push-in 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Not Title I 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not Title I Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  Counseling, Mentor Support Groups, School supplies, Trip/School Event Waivers 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. In progress 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 6  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 7  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 33, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 33 Chelsea Prep will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 9  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 0  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 33 Chelsea Prep , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 1  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 3  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 4  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 33 Chelsea Prep provides ENL/former ENL student with appropriate scaffold and assessments necessary to be able to meet rigorous standards so that they will be college and career ready. The direct instructional program is a structured approach that is differentiated to provide multiple entry points to ensure that all learners have access to the curriculum. Classroom teachers use interactive classrooms, diversity of approaches, clearly defined learning goals, technology, large and small learning groups to target the diverse learning needs of the students. Students are place in instructional groups based on similar performance and/or areas of need. Supplementary programs help provide extra support to ENLS to make academic progress and social emotional growth. All instruction is provided in English. All students will be serviced by Bilingual/Common Branch or ESL/Common Branch certified teachers that use established ESL protocols and strategies in their lessons. PS 33 serves ENL students from Kindergarten through Fifth Grade. Programs Scheduled: After School Enrichment: November- March 2018. 8-10 sessions for 3 groups/cycles. K-1, 2-3, 4-5 Activities include Readers Theatre, Art Exploration, Cooking Fun! Saturday Academy: Begins Feb 2 - April 2. Academy will serve all grades. Test prep will be provided from Grades 3-5. K-2 students will focus on word work, vocabulary and oral language development. All instruction will be taught in English. 3-5 Teachers will work the Title III Programs and approximately 38 students will be served. Materials Needed: Cooking supplies, costumes, props, Art supplies, Test Prep Books, Vocab Program All Title III monies further enhance our program by supporting purchase of supplies and resources to provide programs to allow ENL students to have other opportunities to develop language skills and develop appropriate social emotional behaviors necessary for future academic progress. PS 33 Chelsea Prep provides ENL/former ENL student with appropriate scaffold and assessments necessary to be able to meet rigorous standards so that they will be college and career ready. The direct instructional program is a structured approach that is differentiated to provide multiple entry points to ensure that all learners have access to the curriculum. Classroom teachers use interactive classrooms, diversity of approaches, clearly defined learning goals, technology, large and small learning groups to target the diverse learning needs of the students. Students are place in instructional groups based on similar performance and/or areas of need. Supplementary programs help provide extra support to ENLS to make academic progress and social emotional growth. All instruction is provided in English. All students will be serviced by 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Bilingual/Common Branch or ESL/Common Branch certified teachers that use established ESL protocols and strategies in their lessons. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development ensures that our educators continue to strenthen and refine their practice and stay updated on latest research and new methodologies to provide effective instruction to address student learning needs. All immigrant students beneift by the PD provided to teachers by providing specialized ENL methodologies. All teachers at PS 33 Chelsea Prpe receive professional development. PD time is scheduled for Mondays from 2:40-4:00 PM and Consultants also come during the school day as needed. Teachers are surveyed for topics of interest and in areas they feel they would benefit from additional support with input from administration. Topics include- differentiated instruction, classroom management, shared reding, goal setting, data driven instruction, language acquisition, ENL techniques and strategies, etc. PD Providers include: Principal Cindy Wang, Assistant Principals- Danielle Remsen and Grace How, Teachers College, TCRWP, Math Consultant, Field Support Center ELL Director and staff. Title III monies would go towards specific PD to address specific ENL strategies and supports to further refine and enhance instructional practice to address ENL language development. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent engagement is a vital component to a successful learning community. A collaborative relationship with parents, school and community is necessary when working together to support and improve the learning and development and health of the children. Parents are given opportunities to see learning in action during the school day, participate in SLT meetings and other forums to be an active participant in the school community. All Parents are provided with support to continue the learning at home and in their community. Parent Workshops are provided at various times during the school day and in the evening to provide ample opportunities for all parents to attend. The workshops can last from 30 minutes to an hour. 8 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Topics range from Understanding NYS Learning Standards, Literacy support at Home, NYSESLAT Test Q&A, Math Learning at Home, Internet Safety. Community Organizations like Hudson Guild also provide workshops on financial literacy, immigration, citizenship and social emotional development. Parents are notified via parent letters, posted flyers inside and outside or school, via the PTA and school website. The Parent Coordinator and Principal sends out monthly newletter with updates and relevant articles and recommendations for parents. Blackboard phone texts are sent to parents as reminders for workshops and meetings. All parents are provided with Translation and Interpretation Services to increase parent involvement in our school. There is a Parent Handbook available for all parents. Title III monies would be used to translate important policy documents and to provide additional materials for parents during workshops. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. details to come Per Session: $3700 for teachers $3871 for administration $1021 for Consultant PD details to come $2470 for materials needed for Afterschool Enrichment and Test Prep materials for Saturday Academy details to come n/a n/a $1300 $12,362 n/a n/a Parent Engagement Resources n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 9  0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name PS 33 Chelsea Prep Borough Manhattan School Number 033 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Cindy Wang Coach Susan Myung ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Cristina Tur Teacher/Subject Area Sarah Rorimer/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Erin Lubick/ENL Related-Service Provider Marisa Abelson/SETSS Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Beth Hermelin Coach type here School Counselor Melaine Lawrence Parent type here Parent Coordinator Hanne Kjeldgaard Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 602 1 Total number of ELLs 26 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.32%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Early literacy skills are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell benchmarks. This helps us figure out the child's instructional level, fluency rate and phonemic awareness. Our ELL students are monitored monthly. We monitor the progress of students who are stalled. We focus on comprehension skills in instructional guided reading groups. We scaffold for meaning, focus on vocabulary and word study in context. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2  We use F&Pmonthly reading levels. We determine students strengths and weaknesses in ELA and mathematics. Children are in strategy groups based on areas of need. Teachers help students scaffold questions and understand the intricacies of distractors. We use translated periodic assessments for mathematics. We use the results of the NYSESLAT exam to measure growth and success of ELL programs. Results of ELA/Math exams are used to measure growth. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] K-5 classroom teachers use data from Fountas and Pinnell to assess monthly reading levels. ELA, Math and Science standardized tests results are also analyzed to determine ELLs strengths and weaknesses. Teachers differentiate instruction in their classes by assigning student-based projects tailored to specific levels of second language acquisition. Homework assignments are also modified to support ELLs. needs. Parental input (cultural information/health related information) is taken into consideration while planning classroom instruction. Teachers build upon the linguistic capabilities students bring and use it as a means to guide instruction. Students monitor their own learning by using rubrics aligned to Common Core Standards. Tier I. There is rigorous and evidence-based curriculum aligned to Common Core Standards. Thematic units are aligned to science scope and sequence and the social studies scope and sequence. Curriculum is designed taking into account content and language objectives developmentally appropriate for ELLs. Individual student needs are closely monitored to differentiate instruction. Students progress is being measured on their individualized needs. Tier II. In addition to core instruction, extra attention and activities are being provided to specific students. They are placed in smaller groups and activities are further tailored to accommodate their needs. Tier III. Intensive and individualized instruction is being provided to students who need assistance with specific skills and competencies. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our students are more proficient in listening and speaking than in reading and writing. This pattern is consistent throughout grades 1-5. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 3  a. Freestanding ENL program. Both stand-alone and integrated ENL minutes are provided in a self-contained classroom environment through content-based instruction in all subject areas including reading, writing, math, science, and social studies. Students are grouped according to their language needs using flexible, differentiated groups. Targeted language and content goals drive instruction and assessment is ongoing in all content areas. Technology and hands-on learning activities form the basis of daily lessons, allowing students to develop strong oral proficiency in English while also gaining a foundation in literacy. Native language support is used whenever possible, especially with newcomers. The kindergarten students are grouped heterogeneously in an integrated model (co-taught by certified content area teacher and certified ESL teacher) and standalone ENL. Students receive either 180 or 90 mandated minutes of instruction as per CR Part 154.2 depending on level of proficiency. First grade students are grouped in one class receiving all day instruction by an ESL teacher currently enrrolled in a program to get her common branches certification. Second grade students are grouped heterogeneously in an integrated model (co-taught by certified content area and certified ESL teacher). Second grade students with entering, emerging and transitioning levels are grouped with a third grade student with emerging level of proficiency to receive instruction in a Standalone ENL model. Third, Fourth and Fifth grade students with expanding level of proficiency are grouped as a block. Ninety minutes of instruction is delivered in a fifth grade class as a integrated model. The other 90 minutes of mandated services are delivered during science instruction. Students are grouped in their daily assigned classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students with an entering level of proficiency receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL with ELA. Students with an emerging level of proficiency receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 270 minutes of integrated ENL with ELA. Students with a transitioning level of proficiency receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL with ELA. Students with an expanding level of proficiency receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL with content area that best meets the needs of the students. Students with a commanding level of proficiency receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL with science. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All programs in our school are designed to develop skills in speaking, reading, writing and listening in English language skills. The school follows a balanced literacy program curriculum aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Units of study are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The content objectives and language objectives are defined by the essential questions aligned to the science scope and sequence standards and social studies scope and sequence standards. Instruction is student-driven. Students work on long-term projects that promote higher level thinking and enhance language development. The curriculum provides authentic context for learning precise academic language. Children connect to authentic experiences to deepen receptive and expressive language. Students learn grade level content along with language skills. Non fiction texts are connected to the mainstream curriculum, as well as a series of lessons that build on each other, widen and deepen language proficiency all acrosss the curriculum. Large visuals with graphic 4  organizers help to scaffold content subject matter. A variety of genres including poems, charts, songs and raps are utilized. Listening to rhythmic text accompanied by gestures and movements help make language memorable, facilitating the internalization of vocabulary as well as language patterns and structures. Language is used for authentic purposes utilizing a whole range of language skills - functions, patterns and structures, critical thinking, academic concepts and vocabulary. Vocabulary and skills are taught in context. Using an inquiry approach, integrated units of study are developed through the school year. Basic decoding and comprehension strategies are modeled through Big Books. Word study is done through literature. The students experiment through inquiry based lessons. Reading and writing is enhanced through reflective journaling and read alouds. Students' cultural identities are validated by establishing a classroom environment where children feel safe to share their experiences and inner feelings about the new language and culture. Meaningful activities help ELLs retain their home culture diversity while learning a new language and adjusting to a new social setting. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are able to take math periodic assessmens in their native language. Students are provided with math/science glossaries in their native language to faciliate academic language comprehension. NYS Math and science tests are administered in their native language if they so desire. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. The ESL teacher, classroom teacher and guidance counselor help to support acculturation into the English language school. All SIFE students will participate in ESL after school programs. Students will be provided with buddies and mentors. Currently we do not have any SIFE students. b. Students receive differentiated instruction in product, process and content in small groups. c. We carefully analyze the data with regards to the area where the children need further support. We determine if the support is in reading, writing, speaking or listening and lessons are planned accordingly. Homework assignments are tailored to support the different levels of language acquisition. d. Long-term ELLs strengths and weaknesses are identified. Individualized and interim goals are set. Teachers work collaboratively to strengthen the literacy of each student. The students participate in ESL after school programs in Literacy, Science and Mathematics. Currently we do not have any Long term ELLs. e. Students' needs will be determined and instruction will be planned accordingly. They will have testing accommodations for up to two years after exiting ELL status. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For ELL-SWD, ESL and common branches teachers follow the students' mandated IEPs. Students are provided accommodations and small group instruction. Instruction is individualized and differentiated according to their needs. Content is scaffolded to make it comprehensible. The school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. Students participate in a Common Core-aligned instructional program that regularly ensures continuity of rigurous instruction with high expectations. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In our school ELL-SWDs students are mainstreamed with general education students. The students are grouped homogeneously or heterogeneously for targeted areas of instruction based on various data, such as but not limited to the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. They participate in guided reading instruction according to Fountas and Pinnell reading levels. They create projects tailored to their IEP goals. Homework assignments are also tailored to meet their individualized needs. 5  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELA, Math and content area intervention in grades 3-5 receive targeted instruction in English. Students are provided with differentiated instruction to support their needs. Precise mathematical language is utilized to help students learn key vocabulary words. Students have a lot of experiential learning through thematic units of study. Reader's theater is utilized to help students with oral language and fluency. In addition, accountable talk is utilized as a strategy during grand conversations. Students are provided with translated versions of the Standardized Math and Science exams. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have secured computers for the students in science as well as Hydroponics. Most classrooms have Smartboards and Elmos. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs participate in 33 rd Music Street program, chorus, chess, instrumental music and multicultural programs. They also participate in Rosie's Kids, American Ballroom Dancing, National Dance Institute Programs, CASA Intrepid Program, Studio in a school, Robotics, Cookshop, as well as the Whitney Museum collaboration. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Materials used include Mondo sing alongs, Big Books, books on tape and CDs, read aloud books. Poetry and books for guided reading in addition to Readers Theater, Into English program, balanced literacy and thematic units of study, read along centers and author studies. Computers and I-Pads are utilized for small group support. Students use Starfall and various technology programs integrated into the curriculum. Each classroom is equipped with either Smartboards, ELmos, and/or computers. All teachers also have access to utilize laptops, I-pads and Smart Tables. ELLs demonstrate technical/digital proficiency, in areas including, but not limited to, research on the internet and the use of computers. Students are videotaped with I-Pads to further enhance their fluency and receptive skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ELL students use code switching whenever it facilitates language comprehension. In the ESL program students use their native language among themselves to help each other to accomplish high demand, high challenging areas of instruction. Students practice the use of, and are provided the English and native language versions of (when available), formal and informal assessments. Math and science glossaries are available to students in their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Student support is targeted to their proficiency level and is grade specific. Grade level resources are used and scaffolded for deeper understanding. Manipulatives, visuals and graphic organizers are also used for support. Academic instruction is based on grade level curriculum that is aligned to Common Core Standards. Content area work is grade specific but scaffolded to support the students needs. ELLs participate in small group, task-oriented situations that guide the production of language both in verbal and written form. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Materials used include Mondo sing alongs, Big Books, books on tape and CDs, read aloud books. Poetry and books for guided reading in addition to Readers Theater, Into English program, balanced literacy and thematic units of study, read along centers and author studies. Computers and I-Pads are utilized for small group support. Students use Starfall and various technology programs integrated into the curriculum. Each classroom is equipped with either Smartboards, ELmos, and/or computers. All teachers also have access to utilize laptops, I-pads and Smart Tables. 6  ELLs demonstrate technical/digital proficiency, in areas including, but not limited to, research on the internet and the use of computers. Students are videotaped with I-Pads to further enhance their fluency and receptive skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students and parents have orientations the last week in June. They are given a tour of the school, the ESL room as well as given a description of the program. The school counselor, parent coordinator and ESL teachers welcome newly enrolled ELLs to facilitate a smooth transition in this new cultural and academic environment. Students partner with a classroom buddy to assist them throught the day. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Teachers of ELL students receive support from the school coach. Our ESL teachers go to monthly network support meetings. Our ESL support teacher is a member of the UFT committee on ESL/Bilingual Instruction,a TESOL and ASCD member. The PD Committee assesses the schools needs concerning our ELL population and plans the professional development accordingly. ELL teachers participate in grade level planning with classroom teachers, as well as curriculum planning staff development with outside consultants. ELL Teacher will attend two PD series offered by the Manhattan Borough Field Support Center: Leader Facilitator Training (12/10, 1/7, 1/21, 1/28) and QTEL-Building the Base Series (2/23, 2/24, 3/8 & 3/9) . All teachers receive weekly professional development in how to implement the Common Core Learning Standards in their teaching. Workshops are tailored to address the diversity of our school population such as gifted-talented students, general education students, ELLs and SWDs. Monthly grade meetings are set up where teachers analyze student data and plan thematic units of study with the appropriate differentiation. Classroom intervisitations serve as a model to enhance teacher articulation and further analyze student data. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELL students and parents are taken on middle school tours. ESL programs at the middle school are reviewed with parents/guardians for informed decision making. Students are also involved in mock interviews with a corporate sponsor. The PD committee will schedule ELL-specific workshops to address the CR Part 154.2 requirements. Agendas and attendance 7  will be recorded in the ESL Binder in the Principal's office. ELL teachers participate in grade level planning with classroom teachers, as well as curriculum planning staff development with outside consultants. ELL Teacher will attend two PD series offered by the Manhattan Borough Field Support Center: Leader Facilitator Training (12/10, 1/7, 1/21, 1/28) and QTEL-Building the Base Series (2/23, 2/24, 3/8 & 3/9) . Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents of ELLs are included in all school workshops including literacy, math, book clubs and social emotional workshops. Translations are provided in Spanish and Chinese. Parents also participate in the Cookshop for Families Program. All Parents are invited to Read with your Child, the 1st Friday of the month. Parents are encouraged to read in their native language to their child. We provide Peaceful Parenting Workshops, Learning Leaders Workshops, ELA, Math and ESL workshops. We have trips for ELL students and their parents to landmark sites within the city. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Activities are planned considering the family, cultural and language background of students to celebrate and include students in the school community and to educate staff about its diversity. See 4. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Cindy Wang, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 33 Chelsea Prep School DBN: 02M033 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Cindy Wang Title Principal Beth Hermelin Assistant Principal Hanne Kjeldjaard Parent Coordinator Cristina Tur ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Sarah Rorimer Teacher/Subject Area Erin Lubick Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02 School Name: 033 Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. a)At enrollment, parents fill out the HLIS where they state preferred language for written information and oral communication. b) From the Student Emergency Contact card, parents state preferred language of communication for written and oral information. c) The RHLA report in ATS provides a list of home languages. d) The RAPL report from ATS provides the parents preferred language of communication both written and spoken. 1  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English, Spanish and Chinese. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Annual handbooks, parent-teacher conference announcements,after-school program information, New York State testing dates, calendars, middle school application information. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum nights (September 2015, May 2016) , parent-teacher conference (November 2015, March 2016). Qualified staff will provide translations when an informal interaction with parents requires a language other than English. 2  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? a)Parent survey b) Parental Engagement time c)PTA 3 
