 04M037 School Name: RIVER EAST ELEMENTARY Principal: MIKE PANETTA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 04M037 River East Elementary 310400 01 0037 3K – 5 2351 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10035 212-289-9231 Fax: Email Address: mpanetta@schools.nyc.gov 212-348-2208 Phone Number: MichaelPanetta School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: MichaelPanetta Kayee Chan Leticia Buchanan Natalie Holness Buck Buchanan N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 04 Alexandra Estrella Superintendent: 160 East 120 th St, New York, NY 10035 Superintendent’s Office Address: AEstrel3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-348-4107 Phone Number: 212-348-2873 Fax: Manhattan FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7th Ave, New York, NY 10011 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-705-5856 Phone Number: 718-923-5146 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MichaelPanetta Kayee Chan Leticia Buchanan N/A Buck Buchanan N/A N/A Lisa Kassov Natalie Holness Eileen Maloney *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Claudia Perez Isadora Cocco-Fermin Tabitha Guerrero Tamara Rivera Michele Richards Germaine Traeye-Smith Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school’s motto and mission statement is “We are a part of something greater than ourselves”. Our students will read rigorously, write and speak in a unique and strong voice, and manipulate numbers with competence and confidence. Our students will also explore art, music, dance, theater, and athletics in an effort to find at least one they are passionate about for life.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. River East Elementary is a small school located in East Harlem. Our school has 197 students from PK through 5th Grade. Our school is comprised of 53% Hispanic students, 44% African American students and 2% White students. 51% of our students are male and 49% are female. Our ELL population is 4% and 26% of our students receive special education services. In addition to our academic program, we offer students opportunities to explore art, music, dance, and theater. We have long standing partnerships with organizations like the 92nd. St YMCA and Opus 118, which allow our students to experience chorus, theater, violin, and ceramics as part of the weekly schedule. We believe that exploration of art, music, dance, and theater will help them find at least one area they are passionate about for life. As a small school, we are able to establish a close-knit community and culture. Our teachers are really able to get to know students as individuals, both the students they teach and students in other classes as well. We meet as a school each week for our "Town Meeting," where we sing songs, share work, and talk about community issues. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a very small number of ELL students (4%, 6 total) who are supported by our ESL teacher in mostly push-in instruction. Our special education population is larger (26%, 44 total) and are supported in mostly ICT classrooms, with pull-out services such as SETTS, Speech, OT, and PT. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made significant progress in the Rigorous Instruction element of the Framework. During the 2015-2016 school year, our math proficiency on state exams was 19%. We implemented a new math program (Investigations) the following year and saw progress in the rigor and vertical alignment of the curriculum. Our math scores nearly doubled on the 2016 state exam. During the 2018-2019 year, we will continue to focus on Rigorous Instruction - working on student's number sense and ensuring the rigor of the curriculum, tasks, and assessment matches the rigor of the standards. Other key areas of focus will include: - Reviewing our literacy block to implement word study with fidelity (Rigorous Instruction) - Continue to increase opportunities for student talk in classrooms, especially during partner work and increase the "productive struggle" and assessment practices during student independent work time (Supportive Environment) - Continue to use results from interim assessments in math to plan small group work and individual differentiation (Collaborative Teachers) - Implement protocols during teacher common planning to review student work (Collaborative Teachers) 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 04M037 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 192 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 80.2% % Reduced Lunch 4.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 53.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 5.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.25 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 59.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 75% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 35 35 91.0% 5.7% 26.6% 38.0% 0.0% 3.1% 0 0% 6.1 47.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the 2016-2017 state assessments, 46% of students met State standards on the State math test, but our lowest performing students made little progress on the assessment. During the 2016-2018 school years, we implemented a new math curriculum (Investigations) and spent a large amount of PD time and effort focusing on the format of the new curriculum and ways to improve student talk and discussion during math workshop. Based on the results of our interim testing, our focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be on reviewing units to embed rigorous problem solving into all units and align assessments to the scope and rigor of the standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 100% of teachers will use Investigations curriculum materials with fidelity and design rigorous tasks to supplement and extend mathematics knowledge and thinking as determined by analysis of student work and interim and formative assessments so that, by June 2019, at least 70% of students will score in the Proficient category on the Math Exemplars rubric in 3/5 categories. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Reflect on curriculum maps and adjust units as needed (modify order of some units, supplement others with additional resources) K-5 Teachers September2018 Principal, all teachers Review use of Context for Learning materials and include opportunities for student to practice and demonstrate number sense each day K-5 Teachers, all students September 2018 Principal, all teachers Administer four interim assessments throughout the school year to analyze progress and plan re-teaching of core mathematical content Continue PD on checks-for-understanding during math workshop using our PLC structure (lesson pre-brief, intervisitations of classrooms, and lesson debrief) Utilize Emeplars to assess student problem solving and communication skills Design PD plan that reviews providing multiple entry points for all students (including our students with disabilities and English Language Learners) and task analysis. In addition, PD will focus on what happens to students not engaged or unable to independently access the mathematics task. All students November 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019 Principal, all teachers K-5 Teachers September-December 2018 Principal, all teachers K-5 Teachers September All teachers 2018-June 2019 K-5 Teachers November All teachers 2018-January 2019 Continue work of Vertical Planning Team to standardize key vocabulary, tools, and models across the grades K-5 Teachers Bi-monthly Develop math links on website to provide resources to parents (math games, websites, videos) to help them support their child in math at home Parents September-October 2018 VP Math Committee Members Website Coordinator, Parent coordinator Work with PD provider and/or MFSC math support staff to engage staff in "adult math" activities to model and promote constructivist approach to mathematics K-5 Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, PD Provider 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 3  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the last school year, one of our most attended events was when we invited parents upstairs to their child's classroom directly after Town Meeting to work on a math game/problem. This year, our goal is to do this on a monthly basis - inviting families into the classrooms to work on math with their child. In addition, we will continue to update our school website so that families have resources to support their child at home - games, additional practice problems, videos, etc. Our parent coordinator will monitor attendance at these events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Some TL money will be used to purchase supplemental Context for Learning resources. In addition, per session will be used to encourage teachers to attend Math Collective PD opportunities. The principal will also seek additional support in PD on constructivist mathematics through organizations like Metamorphosis and the MFSC. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 50% of students will score in the Proficient category on the Math Exemplars rubric in 3/5 categories. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) - Exemplar Performance Assessments - Math Interim Assessments - Task Analysis, Student Work, Assessment Analysis Protocols - Principal Observations - Report Cards Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As a small school, our staff has the privilege of getting to know students on an individual basis. Students in the school also have opportunities to interact with their peers in other grades at our weekly Town Meeting. We, however, recognize the need to incorporate additional opportunities for students to share their voice and opinions in the decision making of our school, as evidenced by student responses on the student survey we administered last year. For example, on the student survey we administered to students in early 2018, 68% of our k-2 students answered "Yes" to the question, "I like my school." 22% responded "Sometimes" and 10% responded "No" to that question. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a student representative from each class will be chosen to form a student council, which will lead to a 20% increase in student satisfaction as measured by the student survey (particularly the question, "I like my school"). 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students will complete student satisfaction survey in class SLT will organize and analyze data from the student survey and present to staff at the Election Day PD day Each class will elect a classroom representative to serve on the schoolwide student council and will be inclusive of students with IEPs and ELL students Principal will meet once a month with student council and develop a school-wide initiative to target low areas of student survey Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students October 2018 and March 2019 All teachers All teachers November All teachers 2018 All Students October 2018 All classroom teachers All Students Monthly Principal Student representatives will give reports to the school community each month at Town Meeting All Students Monthly Student Representatives At least once per week, principal will observe students in settings outside of the classroom (lunch, recess, bus line) to improve holistic environment All Students Fall 2018 Principal Assign mentors to "at risk students" that focuses on emotional skill coaching At-Risk Students Fall 2018 Principal, RTI Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents on the PTA will support the student council in planning school-wide events. In addition, we plan to dedicate at least one Town Meeting per month to community building - giving staff, parents, and students opportunities to interact in positive ways. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal will facilitate the monthly student council meeting with a teacher representative (Per Session for Faculty Advisor). 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students will complete a survey in October 2018 and March 2019. In between, we will monitor overall student satisfaction on that particular component throughout the year by administering an additional student survey in February 2019. We expect that student satisfaction will improve by 10% by February 2019 on the question, "I like my school." Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Student Survey - Informal Teacher and Student Interviews - Notes from Student Council Meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers have successfully increased the amount of targeted small group instruction across classrooms. However, based on classroom observation, in situations where small group work is occuring, the students who are not in groups are often disengaged, completing “busy work” or low level tasks, or have rigorous work that they cannot complete without teacher support. Based on the Fountas and Pinnell data from June 2018, approximately 50% of our students are reading below grade level. While 65% or more of our students are making "high progress," there is still a significant amount of students who are not making gains at an appropriate pace. Our CARP Team will conduct a yearlong study of how to adjust our practice to ensure that teachers generate authentic, rigorous tasks, that support independent practice and students have strategies to support themselves and each other (including providing feedback) without always depending on teacher led support. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will develop rigorous independent tasks and routines that are regularly monitored and adjusted based on student need and progress so that 75% of students will make “high progress” (as defined by Nottingham’s Achievement Quadrant Progress) on the Fountas & Pinnell assessment. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Analyze F & P data for the 2017-2018 school year with a focus on high and low students who made little progress CARP Team July 2018 CARP Team will read "The Learning Challenge: How to Guide Your Students Through the Learning Pit to Achieve Deeper Understanding" CARP Team will meet weekly to focus on this problem of practice and cycle through at least five cycles of intervisitations, feedback conversations, etc. During at least one cycle, members of the CARP Team will focus on a student with an IEP who made "low progress" and design an action plan to address those gains. CARP Team Fall 2018 CARP Team Weekly Principal, CARP Team Principal, CARP Team Principal, CARP Team CARP Team October-CARP Team December 2018 CARP Team will share school-wide reading data with staff at the end of each data cycle CARP Team, All Teachers Quarterly CARP Team CARP Team will introduce a weekly comprehension passage (respond to text) that focuses on key comprehension skills in grade 2-5 Assign teachers a peer mentor across PD cycles (groups of 2) to collaborate and provide feedback to one another All Teachers Weekly Teacher Leaders All Teachers Weekly Teachers Survey teachers after each PD cycle for suggestions and feedback All Teachers After Each Teacher Leaders PD cycle 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will conduct a parent survey in the beginning of the school year to survey student reading habits at home. In addition, teachers will use at least one Tuesday "parent engagement" session per month to host a professional learning for parents for best practices in reading and supporting their child's reading at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  - Per Session for CARP Team members - Purchase of text ("The Learning Pit") that team will read together Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 55% of students will make “high progress” (as defined by Nottingham’s Achievement Quadrant Progress) on the F & P assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - F & P Assessment - Low-inference transcripts from classroom visits Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the past few years, our literacy scores have remained steady, with significant improvement during the 2016-2017 school year. However, approximately 20% of our students are reading significantly below grade level, as measured by the Fountas & Pinnell reading assessment (administered in May/June 2018) and it is very challenging for them to catch up once they fall behind. Our school uses the TC Reading and Writing Units of study, and after close reflection on the lack of significant movement in F and P levels and on writing rubrics, we recognize the need to rethink our literacy block to include more small group work, word study, and authentic writing tasks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the principal will work with each grade team will adjust their literacy block to more closely align reading and writing units of study (including an increased focus on word study and vocabulary), which will lead to a 20% increase in students performing at a level 3 or 4 on the State ELA exam. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  PD planning time for teachers to identify places in the curriculum to more closely align reading and writing units of study PD focus on structures of the literacy block and how to flexibly schedule the daily and weekly workshop time All teachers June - Principal September 2018 All teachers November2018 -June 2019 September-December 2018 Work with the CARP team (Collaborative Action Research Project) to study small groups during the literacy block and create a plan to strengthen that structure All teachers Monitor word study (Fundations) in grades K-2 and implement Words Their Way in grades K-5 Engage teacher is book clubs around "When I Was the Greatest" to model effective talk structures to implement in the classroom to support student learning All teachers September-December 2018 All teachers September-October 2018 Work with CARP Team to plan PD on how to target small group instruction (particularly for students with disabilities and ELLs) to support and differentiate for students during reading and writing workshop All teachers September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, CARP Team Members CARP Team Members Principal Principal, Teacher Facilitators Principal, CARP Team Members How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will be responsible for planning at least one parent workshop per month, with each month alternating between reading/writing and math topics. The goal of these workshops will be to give parents tangible strategies they can teach and look for at home when working with their child on their homework or when reading. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  In addition to purchasing Fundations and Words Their Way for word study in the upper grades, grade K-2 teachers will collaborate with Hunter College for literacy staff development. Some funds will be allocated to cover teachers to attend Fundations trainings offered in fall 2018. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 75% of our K-2 students will move at least two reading levels on the F & P reading assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - F & P Reading Levels - TC Writing Assessments (using TC rubric) - Word Study Assessments - MOSL Assessments - "Mock" ELA exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parent attendance at academic events continues to be a struggle (for example, attendance at our potluck dinner/curriculum night was less than 75%). In addition, whole school events (town meetings, whole school trips, field days) continue to have strong attendance and while we do not want to diminish the importance of non-academic events, we believe it is important for families to attend workshops on the reading, writing and math curriculum. For example, our PTA planned a math workshop last year that only 1 parent attended. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each class will select a class parent and invite families into classrooms once per month to see what students are working on, which will lead to 95% of families attending at least two academic events throughout the school year, as evidenced by sign-in sheets collected at each event. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will schedule open houses in classrooms after Town Meetings each month (with translations as necessary) All parents September 2018 Teachers Elect class parent from each class to facilitate communication between teachers and parents All parents October Parent Coordinator School website will updated once a month with school and grade events on the calendar All parents 2018 September 2018 Website Coordinator, Parent Coordinator Parent coordinator and teachers will send home monthly newsletters (in English and Spanish) with information on important events, curriculum, homework, and other important school information All parents Monthly Parent Coordinator School Messenger will promote upcoming events All parents Design more interactive workshops to promote parent engagement in student work (doing math with students; reading with students; creating a take-away from the workshop) All parents Parent Coordinator Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Continue to develop community relationships (with stores, centers, after school programs, political leaders, CBOs) to support parental involvement and participation in the school All parents October-SLT Members December 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our parent coordinator will continue to find CBOs that can support our work with workshops and/or other resources. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Sign-in sheets - Parent Coordinator Reflection and Feeback 5  - School Website, Twitter, Facebook Responses Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we expect that 75% of families will have attended at least one academic event at River East. Our Parent Coordinator and teachers will work with the families of the other 25% to encourage them to attend future events, as evidenced by sign-in sheets at these events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Sign in sheets in classrooms at events - Parent Survey - Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group work and one-to-one work During the school day -Fundations -Wilson -Targeted guided reading -Targeted smallgroup work -Targeted small group work -Fluency practice Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) - Running Records - Student writing scored by TC rubric - State Test scores Mathematics - Unit tests Science - Interim assessments -MOSL assessments - Looking at student work Social Studies - Running Records At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) - Looking at student work The Guidance Counselor (Maura Kyne), ESL teacher (DruniaDruvier)provide at-risk services when they are needed through both push-in and pull-out services. Small group work and one-to-one work During the school day - Additional instruction in concept - Additional instruction in content Small group work and one-to-one work Small group work and one-to-one work During the school day During the school day - Preview important vocabulary - Social Skills Groups - Coping Skills Groups - Anger Management Groups - Family Issues Group Small group work and one-to-one work During the school day 7  8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 26 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School messenger is used to inform parents of events and notify them of any important information and is paid for through Title I funds. The guidance counselor also provides at-risk counseling to students and is partially funded with Title I funds. Students are provided with other supplies (backpacks, notebooks, etc.) or supports as needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teachers are given preference sheets in the spring which are then used in consultation with the teacher and the administration to consider the ideal placement and assignment for the following school year. After the assignments are made the vacant positions are filled through a hiring committee and administrator that reviews resumes and invites candidates to interview. Candidates who have promising interviews are then invited to teach a “demo lesson” with the grade they are potentially teaching. If the demo lesson is solid, the teacher is hired after a lesson reflection. After teachers are hired, they are assigned a mentor who works with them throughout the year to help them transition to the River East community, especially in the case of first-year teachers. In order to promote teacher retention we encourage teachers to take on leadership roles within the school. Currently we have 6 teachers who are graduates of the Teacher Leadership Program (TLP). These roles allow teachers to expand their influence and engagement in our community. This year, 7 teachers are participating in the CARP (Collaborative Action Research Program) program and 3 additional teachers are participating in TLP (Teacher Leadership Program). While our staff turnover has been very low the last two school years, our hiring committee rigorously works with our connections at local colleges and universities to recruit teachers who are a good fit for our school community. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). After teachers are hired they are assigned a mentor who works with them throughout the year to help them transition to River East, especially in the case of first-year teachers. 1  Professional development sessions are designed by analyzing the results of teacher surveys as well as other professional development sessions designed by the administration based on the results of teacher observations and school walk-throughs. The instructional cabinet (principal and two teacher leaders) outline the PD calendar for the year and meet bi-weekly to make adjustments as necessary. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). A “Meet Your New Teacher” day is scheduled in June of each year as a chance for the PK students to meet the Kindergarten team. There is also a “Meet and Greet” scheduled in September for all new parents to the school. The Pre-K teacher also meets with the Kindergarten teachers in the spring to talk about the students and ease transitions between the grades, including sharing student work portfolios, anecdotal data, and other resources. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Each grade level is given the freedom to choose their own MOSL assessments not only for their individual teacher ratings but also for formative assessments throughout the year. In general, we utilize F & P to monitor reading progress, TC writing assessments to monitor writing progress, and school-created interim assessments to monitor mathematics progress. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 2  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $100, 761 $46,871 0 0 $1,388,649 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-5E None N/A N/A 5A-5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 3  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. River East Elementary , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act {ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. River East Elementary will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., /State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. 6  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● providing families with a "Parent Handbook" that outlines important school policies ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) River East Elementary , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 7  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 8  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I requirements.. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 9  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 04 School Name River East Elementary Borough Manhattan School Number 37 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mike Panetta Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Drunia Duvivier Teacher/Subject Area Claudia Perez Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Alexandra Estrella Assistant Principal N/A Coach School Counselor Maura Kyne Parent Monika Burra Parent Coordinator Vylmary Bennett Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 190 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 9 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.74% 1  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, we employ a variety of assessments. Emergent readers are assessed on concepts of print, letters, and sounds. Students are also given Fountas & Pinnell running records and coordinating comprehension questions. The F&P assessment is administered in English and includes interval assessments that inform the direction of instruction and continuous assessment that monitor student progress. The data gathered from the F&P Assessments allows us to know where to drive our instruction and groups. Some of our formative assessments include oral comprehension, reading comprehension, complete writing assignments, and works independently. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The results of the F & P assessments along with ELL language and academic progress reports are used by each grade level to select a target group of students to focus on in writing, guided reading or book clubs. If a student, ELL or otherwise, is seen as 2  underperforming they are brought up to the RTI team who makes an individualized plan for each student. Teachers also confer with groups and individual students and assess accordingly, changing groups as necessary. Our ELL teacher meets with teachers during common planning periods and during Monday and Tuesday PD time. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use performance-based summative assessment tasks in k-5 to benchmark progress at the end of each unit. These assessments are based on classroom instruction and everyday tasks. They allow us to assess ELLs' language proficiency and academic achievement through oral responses, mini-plays or presentations, written assignments, and end-of-a unit or chapter test. Students use scoring rubrics and checklists to evaluate their grade. These assessments have been helpful in documenting ELLs' growth over a period of time. In addition, teachers confer with groups and individual students to monitor progress and target specific skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We use the summative data to make instructional adjustments, evaluate the effectiveness of our curriculum, and determine intervention strategies for our students, including our ELLs. The more we know about individual students as they engage in the learning process, the better we can adjust classroom instruction to ensure that all students continue to achieve by moving forward in their learning. Additionally, ELL teacher meets with teachers during common planning periods to discuss formative and summative data during Monday and Tuesday PD time to assess progress and further target specific areas of need. For example, if a student scored low in reading comprehension, the ELL teacher would focus lessons on integrating vocabulary and comprehension by helping the student use vocabulary words to show their understanding of the story. The student's teachers in science, math, and English would also help to reinforce responses or ask the student to explain their answer. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school’s RTI team meets weekly to discuss the needs of students. The team is comprised of our school’s administration, speech therapist, SETTS teacher, guidance counselor and ESL teacher. The ESL teacher is an important part of the team as it assures best practices for ELLs can be implemented into recommendations for students brought to the RTI team. Currently, if a teacher has data to support a student is not progressing as expected in the classroom, he or she brings the case to the RTI team where the team reviews the case and helps to implement Tier 1 or Tier 2 suggestions. The team uses the data to guide instruction for ELLs and employs ELL-specific strategies into all recommendations based on the expertise of our school’s ESL teacher. Our school's foundation of RtI for ELLs is high-quality core, or Tier 1, instruction focused on promoting language and literacy development. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At the beginning of the school year, we use the results from the ELA, Math, and NYSESLAT assessment to assess the progress, growth, and performance of our ELL students. The ENL teacher uses English as a Second Language Learning Standards K-5 and ESL Performance Indicators to help students acquire, interpret, apply, and transmit information for content area learning and personal use based on each students individual scores in speaking, listening, reading, and writing. For example, a sample classroom tasks in ESL by English proficiency level for Entering students would include students listening to a nonfiction book such as What Animals Eat. With teacher support, they use a chart to organize information from the text: they match pictures of animals with the animals' written names as teacher calls out the names. Transitioning (intermediate) students completes Beginning task. With the help of the teacher, they compile an animal word wall. Referring to the wall, pairs of students create two two list, one of meat eaters and one of plant eaters, and they write descriptions of each animal (e.g., telling how it looks, moves, where it lives). Expanding (advanced) students complete Transitioning task. With teacher support, pairs of students write and illustrate their own Animal book, using information from the class charts and word wall (e.g., I am a plant eater and I am pink. Who am I? Additionally, our ENL teachers incorporate language objectives and language functions in their lessons, which benefits all student learners. This includes oral language to build on all students existing oral language competencies to support literacy learning and content knowledge. We achieve this by building students’ oral language skills in specialized vocabulary and specialized structures of academic language, which is essential for ELLs to succeed in school. Our teachers 3  preview key concepts and review four challenging vocabulary words, drawing on and using students’ home languages whenever possible. We use a host of ELL strategies, including close, interactive reading aloud, sentence transformations through guided dialogue, and language frames for speaking and listening. Our teachers model fluent, expressive reading, and helps ELLs enhances their reading comprehension. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the year, the whole staff meets together. Teachers are given data by grade level (K-1, 2-3, 4-5) and reviews result from the prior school year's assessments, specifically looking at the performance of ELLs and students with disabilities. This includes students performance on the RLAT report that is generated from ATS and additional reports generated from the EDAT Tool. Teachers reflect on the entitled students scores in each of the modalities and design programming with the ENL teacher focusing on students strength and developmental areas. Teachers also reflect on how best to leverage the intergrated or stand-alone model, grouping structures, differentiation, and other class structures to make adjustments and interventions for the current school year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered in a combination of stand-alone and integrated periods by our certified ESL teacher. Students who placed Entering on the NYSESLAT receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction weekly (180 stand alone, 180 integrated). Students who placed Emerging receive 360 minutes of ESL instruction weekly (180 stand alone, 180 integrated). Students who place Transitioning receive 180 minutes of ESL instruction weekly and those who place Expanding receive 180 integrated minutes of ESL instruction weekly as well. The program models are heterogeneous in both proficiency levels and grade levels. Given the small ELL population of our school, our ESL teacher typically combines students in Kindergarten and first grade, second grade and third grade, and fourth grade and fifth grade. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are grouped according to the mandates of Part 154-2: Entering receives 360 minutes of ESL instruction weekly (180 stand alone, 180 integrated). Emerging receives 360 minutes of ESL instruction weekly (180 stand alone, 180 integrated). Transitioning receives 180 minutes of ESL instruction weekly. Expanding receives 180 integrated minutes of ESL instruction weekly. Home Language Arts: two courses weekly with a bilingual teacher ESL teachers works with teachers on the unit plan for the integrated programs during literacy blocks. 4  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Stand-Alone ESL classes are conducted solely in English. To make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, our certified ESL teacher develops her own curriculum but incorporates lessons from TC, SIOP, Finish Line, and QTEL. The curriculum encompasses content, standards and language objectives to provide students with a language-rich, comprehensible curriculum to foster language development while aligning with the CCLS. Instructional approaches focus on students learning English as a new language to acquire, interpret, and express their opinions and judgments on experiences, ideas, and issues from a variety of perspectives. ENL students also engage in cooperative learning to develop and use skills and strategies to communicate effectively in the classroom and social interactions. They use a variety of oral, print, and electronic forms such as book clubs, poetry writing, and mini plays to demonstrate appropriate classroom and social interactions. Additionally, students at River East Elementary School are exposed to a genre-based balanced literacy curriculum, developed by the Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Program at Columbia University. Native language books and materials are available in the ESL classroom to help support student’s native language development and content comprehension. Grade-appropriate materials and content are taught through scaffolded instruction, methods of ESL instruction, and collaborative learning. As a means to help support students within their classroom, the ESL teacher works closely with classroom teachers to follow themes and lessons being taught. Students are exposed to authentic grade texts, and materials as well as the explicit teaching of reading and writing strategies in addition to problem-solving strategies that will aid ELLs in meeting the standards of local and state assessments. Teachers meet with groups of students and individual students as needed. The ESL classroom boasts audio assisted learning (listening center), environmental print and content-rich materials. Students are able to develop their skills and strengths in the four modalities of listening, reading, writing, listening and speaking through the implementation of Writer’s Workshop, Reader’s Workshop, paired learning activities, songs, presentations, reader’s theaters, and field trips which are all appropriately aligned with age and grade level content-based curriculum. Students are guided through Writer’s Workshop through the Language Experience Approach (LEA), vocabulary instruction, modeled writing, graphic organizers, etc. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? If a student places below the cut-off score on the LAB-R indicating he or she qualifies for ESL services, the Spanish LAB is administered. The Spanish LAB is a valuable tool that allows us to measure students’ native language strengths. Knowing that a person’s proficiency level in their L1 is the greatest indicator of language acquisition in the L2, the ESL teacher can use the measurable outcomes from the Spanish LAB to tailor instruction. Students also have access to texts in their native language in the classroom libraries and they meet with a bilingual teacher who communicates and conducts the lesson in the child native language. The ENL teacher also translates vocabulary words that give pictorial support, pictures, and videos in the student's L1. The information and/or content are included in each lesson plan. The programs are evaluated based on Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL classroom instructions. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The individual needs of each student are met through differentiated instruction. Teachers compose an instructional plan to help support the student(s) in their specific ELL subgroups areas of need. Currently, there are no SIFE students at River East Elementary School. However, if our population included SIFE, we would implement additional instructional support, specifically targeted to meet the needs of these students. Additional instructional support might include in-class scaffolds and differentiation, literacy intervention, small-group math instruction, guided reading instruction, Reading Recovery, Wilson Reading System and Fundations. In particular, to create access to content learning for all 5  ELLS, teachers will modify their speech to provide a greater amount of "comprehensible input". Modifying speed, complexity, and syntax allows all ELLs to better understand oral language used in the classroom. Additional classroom instructions includes discourse adaptation such as frontally facing learners while giving directions, using the same words and phrases repeatedly rather than using a variety of expressions, paraphrasing or restating student statements, employing gestures and intonation to convey key concepts or words, and writing the words and using visual supports to oral speech. Ell students, newcomers , or transfers have access to nonfiction texts in their native language. Instructional approaches are designed according to the results of ongoing assessment and observations conducted by both the ESL and classroom teachers. Additionally, all long-term ELL students receive academic support tailored to their needs. Furthermore, the students receive stand alone ELL instruction which focuses on reading, writing and listening as implied by their scores on the 2016 NYSESLAT tests. Instructional strategies within the ESL classroom are geared toward reading comprehension, decoding, fluency, writing organization and syntax. Listening exercises are conducted on a regular basis to help students with listening comprehension. Instructional strategies implanted within the ESL classroom reflect the individual needs of these students, as highlighted on their IEP. Furthermore, the ESL and classroom teachers collaborate and work together to share best practices and to help maintain instructional consistency. For Long-Term ELL, there are no Long-Term ELLs at River East Elementary School at this time. But, if our population included Long-Term ELLs, we would analyze recent NYSESLAT scores and other forms of assessment to identify areas and modalities of concern. Once identified, we would compose an instructional plan to help support the student(s) in their specific areas of need. Specifically, we would start with language experience photo series teaching Long-term Ells content and academic language. The stories come from the students' experiences so prior knowledge connection are strong. The teachers take the developing language of the student and construct language that a bit beyond the students' language developmental levels so the text is at the instructional reading and writing levels of the students. Then the teacher models with exemplars how to approach writing a narrative text and provides students with interactive opportunities to engage in expressing their ideas first through oral and then writing. Essentially, students are reading, speaking, and listening throughout the writing experience. Our processes for former ELLs requires all parents of former ELLs to be immediately notified of the change in ELL status. All families receive transition letters. Former ELLs receive testing accommodations for two years as well as 90 minutes a week of service due to the mandates of Part 154. Additionally, they are classified on data reports so teachers will be aware of their unique learning needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Identified ELL-SWDs receive individualized academic support both within and outside of the classroom. We make accommodations when necessary to ensure that students receive equitable access to grade-level content. Differentiated instructions are culturally and linguistically appropriate and reflect an adjustment to students needs. Scaffolded instruction is provided to help students and provide them with instruction tailored to the needs of each student. Our instructional strategies build knowledge through content with rich nonfiction and informational text. Reading and writing are grounded in evidence from the text, and students have regular practice with complex text and its academic vocabulary. Students learn to support their opinion with evidence (fact, reasons, examples, etc.) Additionally, the specific needs of each student and best practices of instruction reflect the needs outlined in students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP). Classroom teachers and the ESL teacher work closely together to provide best instructional strategies and to help maintain instructional consistency inside and outside of the mainstream classroom. These practices provide access to content areas in addition to accelerating ELL-SWDs language development. Such instructional strategies and grade-level materials include: adapted materials, small group instruction, repeated directions, modified directions, etc. Our ESL and special education teachers work together to provide each student with the appropriate content and instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, our ESL teacher and related service providers work closely to avoid scheduling conflicts. In addition, our ESL teacher plans pull-out groups during appropriate times. She also 6  staggers the pull-out groups throughout the week so the student is not missing the same subject matter throughout each week. Additionally, our ELL teacher pushes into classes to help students within their classroom setting. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school’s RTI team meets weekly to discuss the needs of students. The team is comprised of our school’s administration, speech therapist, SETTS teacher, guidance counselor and ESL teacher. The ESL teacher is an important part of the team as it assures best practices for ELLs can be implemented into recommendations for students brought to the RTI team. Currently, if a teacher has data to support a student is not progressing as expected in the classroom, he or she brings the case to the RTI team where the team reviews the case and helps to implement Tier 1 or Tier 2 suggestions. The team uses the data to guide instruction for ELLs and employs ELL-specific strategies into all recommendations based on the expertise of our school’s ESL teacher Targeted interventions include Fundations, Recipe for Reading, Wilson, and other programs depending on the needs of the student being discussed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Due to the change in mandates for ELL students the ELL program has been modified to contain more "push-in" services in addition to the standalone ELL program. The low number of mandates has changed our ELL model to a part-time teacher (Sunny Kim) instead of a full-time program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The low number of mandates has changed our ELL model to a part-time teacher (Drunia Duvivier) instead of a full-time program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our school partners with the 92 nd St. Y as well as Opus 118 for in-school music programs. Students are notified about the programs both in English and in Spanish in order to faclilitate ELL students to become involved in the program. Our school does not have an afterschool program on site but the afterschool programs that we are connected to (Wagner Houses, Jefferson Park, Salvation Army Orchestra) are communicated to parents via our parent coordinator Vylmary Bennett who is bilingual and capable ot translating the materials to parents. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs are supported through a combination of in-class support (which does not require additional materials) and pull-out support. For in-class support the teacher may provide graphic organizers and additional resources including iPads and technology (in home language if necessary) to support the needs of ELL students. For the pull-out support the teacher has the use of several intervention programs such as Recipe for Reading and Fundations as well as a self-designed curriculum to support the needs of students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? DL and TBE are not programs offered at our school. ENL students are supported through their home language as well as in English by the ESL teacher. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are grouped in small groups of no more than two consecutive grades which ensures that their instruction will be targeted towards their age and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 7  ELLs are supported through a combination of in-class support (which does not require additional materials) and pull-out support. For in-class support the teacher may provide graphic organizers and additional resources including iPads and technology (in home language if necessary) to support the needs of ELL students. For the pull-out support the teacher has the use of several intervention programs such as Recipe for Reading and Fundations as well as a self-designed curriculum to support the needs of students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school has a "Meet and Greet" with new families during August of every year during which several bilingual staff members are available to help parents and students that are adjusting to our school. The parent coordinator (Vylmary Bennett), ELL teacher (Drunia Duvivier) and other staff members assist in this transition. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ELL teacher attends professional development offered by Central New York City Department of Education offices as well as district and schoolwide PDs. Our staff also engages in professional development cycles that are driven by teacher interest so the ELL teacher has an opportunity to work on their pedagogy and curriculum with peers on Monday afternoons. Our ESL teacher (Drunia Duvivier), as well as our guidance counselor (Maura Kyne), principal (Mike Panetta) and secretary (Tara Cadell) also attend various professional development workshops throughout the year offered by the District and Central offices that apply to both ELL and non-ELL students. Our ELL teacher attends professional development offered by Central New York City Department of Education offices as well as district and schoolwide PDs. Our staff also engages in professional development cycles that are driven by teacher interest so the ELL teacher has an opportunity to work on their pedagogy and curriculum with peers on Monday afternoons. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor, Maura Kyne, assists all parents and students in the middle school transition process. One on one meetings with the guidance counselor are arranged. Maura Kyne also provides professional development for teachers on the process of transitioning students throughout the year. Agendas for every Monday professional development are distributed to teachers and collected by the administration. 8  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ELL teacher uses the Tuesday "parent engagement" time to meet with parents individually. If translations are needed the teacher will ask the parent coordinator (Vylmary Bennett) or paraprofessional or teacher to translate or interpret. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parent coordinator (Vylmary Bennett), who is bilingual, has parent workshops monthly throughout the year. She is also available to translate for other workshops that occur in the classroom and schoolwide. Parent workshops include RTI, Cookshop, test prep and other topics that are of interest to parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mike Panetta, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: River East Elementary School DBN: 04M037 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mike Panetta Title Principal N/A Assistant Principal Vylmary Bennett Parent Coordinator Drunia Duvivier ENL/Bilingual Teacher Monika Burra Parent Alyssa Rhodes Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Maura Kyne School Counselor Alexandra Estrella N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: River East Elementary School Superintendent: Alexandra Estrella DBN: 04M037 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Vylmary Bennett Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registration, all parents complete a Home Language Intake Survey (HLIS) with a licensed pedagogue. If available, the HLIS is provided in the home language if it is other than English. At this point, parents indicate their preferred language of both written and oral communication. To assist in translation, the school has a list of bilingual staff members who can assist with translations and interpretations. Additionally, the school utilizes the Department of Education’s Translation and Interpretation Unit. After the home language has been identified on the HLIS, the information is entered into ATS for documentation of the preferred language of communication. The only home language that has been chosen is Spanish. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2  English Spanish Nyanja Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 220 21 1 90.91 8.68 .41 219 21 1 90.5 8.68 .41 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Welcome Letter and other registration documents September 2017 Monthly Newsletter and Calendar Monthly Report Cards November 2017 March/June 2018 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent coordinator translates communications from principal to parents. Parent coordinator and other school staff translate. School staff translates narrative reports for parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings Curriculum Night September 2018 How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? School staff is available to translate for parents. 3  Parent/Teacher Conferences November 2018 March/June 2019 Language line will also be available for translation. Teachers sign up for translation services and Spanish-speaking staff members provide that service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our parent coordinator is available to translate all emergency communications, including written notices and/or messages sent on School Messenger. The language line will assist in translating emergency information to families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At our first meeting in September, the staff is made aware of the staff members fluent in Spanish (Vylmary Bennett, Elizabeth Canela, Berta Gomez, Keyla Guardado, Alyssa Rhodes, Tony Rosario). Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents received the Parent Bill of Rights upon registration. Staff will use the Translation and Interpretation Unit's website to translate signage, brochures, etc. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 4  The Learning Environment survey is analyzed every summer by the administration and an internal survey is given to parents by the parent coordinator requesting the types of services that parents would like to see in the school. The survey is made available in both English and Spanish. 5 
