 02M042 School Name: P.S. 042 BENJAMIN ALTMAN Principal: MAY LEE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Benjamin Altman School 02M042 School Number (DBN): 02M042 Pre-K - 5 71 Hester Street New York, NY 10002 212-226-8410 Phone Number: 212-431-7384 Fax: May Wong Lee MLee4@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Email Address: May Wong Lee Grace Law Ho Au Yeung May Wong Lee Wincy Lum NA Stephanie Lee District Information Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 Seventh Avenue, 7 th Floor New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3815 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Floor New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. May Wong Lee Grace Law Ho Au Yeung Beatrice Fratta NA Stephanie Lee Wincy Lum Xian Yu Wu Wai Lot Lam Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent   Grace Zhang N/A NA Lezette Rivera Allen Ng Rowena Lee Grace Law NA NA Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Parent Member/ Member/ Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At PS 42, we believe in a child-centered learning environment in which our children can develop as literate thinkers. We use literature and authentic experiences to develop literacy and ability in all content areas. We provide opportunities that help children meet the challenges of today and tomorrow. Our children's languages, experiences and cultures are valued, and utilized to foster self-esteem and to develop new skills and concepts.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 42 is located in a historical section of the Lower East Side of Manhattan. The school opened in 1898 and is a community landmark. A tour of Hester Street would not be complete without viewing the beautiful architecture and façade of the school. P.S. 42 has a large enrollment of immigrant families, most of whom are from China. Generations of families from various backgrounds have contributed to the school’s rich history and culture throughout the century. In our child-centered learning environment, children can develop as critical and literate thinkers via authentic learning experiences and inquiry-based learning. We use authentic literature to develop literacy in all content areas and foster experiences that help children meet the challenges of today and tomorrow. The children’s language and experiences are valued and utilized to develop self-esteem, new skills, and concepts. In keeping with the school’s interdisciplinary approach to learning, school-wide and grade-wide learning focuses are established and refined annually to meet the needs of our students. We are consistently engaged in helping our children develop literacy and problem-solving skills. P.S. 42’s nurturing environment extends beyond the school day through exemplary after-school programs, on-site, as well as off-site. At P.S. 42, students, staff, parents, and community work together toward environmental and social awareness, empowerment, problem resolution, and school improvement. In this community of learners and ambitious workers, there are numerous collaborations between the school and community-based organizations and agencies, universities and cultural institutions to maximize knowledge and expertise and create an effective school. We have a collaboration with several colleges and high schools from which we receive student teachers/interns and volunteer translators, i.e., New York University, Teachers College, Bank Street College, Seward Park Campus H.S., City College of New York, Fordham University and the High School of Dual Language and Asian Studies. We work closely with a number of community-based organizations, i.e., Chinese-American Planning Council, Immigrant Social Services (which conducts summer and after-school program in our school), the YMCA, University Settlement, Henry Street Settlement, Mei Wah After School, Chen Dance Studio, and the Charles B. Wang Clinic. The private sectors with which we collaborate include Goldman Sachs, Scholastic, Junior Achievement, My Own Book Foundation, and numerous small local businesses. Teachers participate in professional development activities in a number of institutes, i.e., Teachers College, Bank Street College, New York University, the New York Historical Society, Eldridge Street Synagogue, Dancing Classrooms, Chen Dance, Museum of Chinese Americans, The Kellogg Foundation Grant in collaboration with the Asian American Federation and the Lower East Side Tenement Museum. We also have ongoing collaborations and instructional programs through Junior Achievement, Midori and Friends, Center for Architecture, Chen Dance Studio, The New York Football Club, Third Street Music School, Open Airways and Y.M.C.A. Swim for Life, Third Street Music School and The Kellogg Foundation Grant. 0  We are committed to refining our Inquiry Based Learning Model throughout the grades. Our literature-based reading program includes the use of fiction and non-fiction books, periodicals, primary sources, and documents. We use Investigations in Math, Writers Workshop and Balanced Literacy integrated into an Inquiry-Based Social Studies Curriculum. Our Science Program uses a hands-on, inquiry-based approach with open laboratories for the upper and lower grades. An inquiry-based approach is also used for instruction to meet the Next Generation Learning Standards. We are broadening our work with performance-based learning and authentic assessments, as well as with the Danielson Framework toward teacher effectiveness. We will continue to grow with more in-depth work in this initiative. We have very successful enrichment and extra-curriculum programs, i.e. Dancing Classrooms, Computer, Drama and Art Clubs, Chess Club, Basketball Club, Table Tennis Club, Board Game Club and Badminton Club Conflict Resolution Program, The P.S. 42 Green Team, Department of Transportation Safety Program, Plymouth Plantation, Chen Dance Afterschool Program, Junior Achievement, Track and Field Program, Friday Night Basketball Clinic and Apex Basketball Program. P.S. 42 is very proud of our Annual Events and other activities that build community and foster collaboration and are open to students and community i.e. P.S. 42 Smorgasbord, Family Day, the Literacy Fair and Science Fair open to students and the community, our annual Career Day, College Awareness Day, Halloween Parade, 100 th Day of School Celebration, Grade-specific study for the inquiry-based units i.e. a “Mercado” to celebrate the 3 rd grade Mexican study, 2 nd grade Bridge Celebration to celebrate the collaboration with the Center of Architecture, and our successful collaborations with the Audubon Society, the Drawing Center, the Center for Architecture, Chen dance Celebration, and Studio in a School. Student attendance has been excellent. The data from the most recent annual school report published lists attendance as 97.5% - a record of which we are very proud. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The children entering Pre-Kindergarten classes at P.S. 42 are predominately limited in English proficiency. Many of our children come from homes with working parents who earn low wages and where the grandparents are the primary caretakers. We need to develop an appropriate early childhood learning environment that meets the educational, social, and psychological needs of our four-year-old students. This past year there has been a focus on mindfulness which was supported by introducing yoga throughout the school in ten-week cycles. Our new partnership with Teachers College has brought in student teachers whose goals were to introduce mindfulness activities and to integrate them into our interdisciplinary studies. This coming year our Pre-Kindergarten teachers will be embarking on their second year of professional development that will support the social-emotional growth of our Pre-Kindergarten students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. This past school year the Inquiry Team reviewed student data from standardized tests, portfolios, MOSL assessments and classroom performances. Based on our assessments, it was evident that there is a group of ENL/SWD students in the third grade and fourth grade in need of additional support. These students were identified and were supported throughout the school year with the Reading Recovery for 1st graders, the S.P.I.R.E program for 1st graders and up and Sound Sensible for the Kindergarteners. Progress was tracked throughout the school year with bi-monthly reading assessments. Families were invited in to observe the sessions and were routinely apprised of all progress made by their child. By the end of school year 17-18, all students in both the Sound Sensible and S.P.I.R.E. program have moved up several reading levels with more than half now on grade level. To support students with their socio-emotional growth, besides our full-time bilingual counselor, there was also an intern from Columbia working with small groups of students. Yoga sessions were for the students were a part of their 1  school day. We have also partnered with Teacher’s College, hosting student teachers with a focus on the mental well-being of students by practicing their craft of holistic activities. This school year, we will also be hosting an art therapist intern from N.Y.U to support our student’s socio-emotional growth. We need to continue to increase the involvement of parents in all school activities. This past year, we were able to sign up over 80% of our families to SchoolCNXT. Our target for the upcoming school year will be 90%. We will continue to offer opportunities for families to volunteer at the school thus engaging them in their child's educational process. This school year with the input of all members of the school community, The Family Engagement team will revise and put out a new Family Handbook to better support our students and families. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M042 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 653 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 62 48 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 75.0% % Attendance Rate 71.5% % Reduced Lunch 34.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 0.2% 6.7% 2.5% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 61.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 15 74 97.2% 0.8% 16.8% 1.4% 88.7% 0.8% 2 6% 6.5 78.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A celebration this school year is the distinction of being a Reward School because of the success we had in the movement of ENL students for the school year 2016-2017. We will continue to focus on the progress of our ENL students for the school year 2018-2019. The School Leadership Team looked at the data-results on the standardized tests, i.e., the ELA; results of the DRA/TC and periodic assessments and reviewed findings of the school’s Inquiry Teams, Pupil Personnel Team, and Academic Intervention Team. We determined that, while our school is showing both general performance and individual student progress, we need to ensure sustainability of school performance and student growth and to move (small) percentage of students who are not meeting the standards or not showing sufficient gains. The Framework for Great Schools Report, 2017-2018 reveals a drop in the English Median Growth Percentile for the school’s lowest third in relation to the previous two years for our school. The guide also shows that regarding the State ELA, while there was a slight decrease in proficiency levels between 2016 and 2017 from 48% to 46% respectively, the percentage of level 3 or 4's remained constant which was at least 10% above our comparison group. Based on recommendations from the most recent Quality Review and Principal Performance Reviews, the school will continue to assess the students three times throughout the school year with the Teachers College Reading and Writing Performance Assessments. We will also evaluate routinely between the TCRWP assessments with DRA assessments to better inform our teaching practices and to better meet the needs of the students. Our Inquiry Team will continue to analyze data from the sources mentioned above focusing on meeting the needs of each student. To deepen our Math Instruction, we will bring in CFLM to support and challenge our teacher's growth and understanding of teaching Math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, more than 50% of the students will show at least one year’s growth on the ELA and/or DRA, and at least one third will show up to 1½ year’s growth, with more than 50% of the students in the lowest third of school performance moving up to the second third. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  At the onset of the school year and throughout the year, all teachers will continue toward full compliance with Professional Development Time/Inquiry Team Work in order to review data, monitor progress of students and plan instruction and intervention. Academic intervention will be provided during extended school time and through scheduled time during the day with assigned specialty, academic intervention teacher. By June 2019, targeted students will meet performance goals. We will provide workshops to familiarize parents with data reports on the school and on their children and with Next Generation Learning Standards, as well as with ways in which they can enhance their ability to serve as teaching partners. We will work with collaborators/partners. We will identify students in need of support, including students with special needs, early grades, ENL’s, reluctant learners and provide appropriate instruction and services in the classrooms and through special programs and best practices, i.e. integrated learning, inquiry and project-based activities, early intervention from (Reading Recovery, S.P.I.R.E, Sound Sensible) and push-in and pull-out support. This will be supported through funding sources which will include Title I School Wide Projects, TL Fair Student Funding, TL Summer School (Shared). Parents will be engaged in activities that familiarize them with accessing data on their children and the school i.e. New York Schools Account. Workshops will be provided to familiarize parents with the curriculum and with strategies for supporting their children at home. Opportunities will be provided for parents to meet with staff in order to have input and collaboratively plan for success. Teachers will engage in lesson study within grade and across the grade with a focus on inquiry based learning. Students will have a voice in the development of these studies. There will be continual Parent Workshops to keep families up to date with student progress. Experts will be invited to provide PD for teachers and support staff. These experts will include CBOs, Social Services, Educators and In-School Experts. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September - June Teachers, Inquiry Teams and Support Staff Principal, Reading Coach, Literacy Coach, Teacher Leader (Math), ENL Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, ENL Lead Teachers ENL’s, SWD September - June September - June Faculty, Families, Students and Administration September - June Faculty, Families, Students and Administration Principal, Reading Coach, Literacy Coach, Teachers, ELL Coordinator, Guidance, SBST, ENL Lead Teachers Principal, Reading Coach, Technology Specialist, Literacy Coach, Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator, ENL Lead Teachers Principal, Reading Coach, Technology Specialist, Literacy Coach, ENL Lead Teachers, Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will offer a survey with a menu of topics on Rigorous Instruction and Next generation Learning Standards to the families. The surveys will be collected and workshops will be developed to address all the areas of concerns. By February 2019 50% of the topics will be addressed through workshops, literature and family outreach via SchooCNXT. By June 2019 100% of the concerns will be addressed. An end of the year survey will be used to assess the program. The members involved in this initiative will be administration, SBST, PPT, and Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Support will be from Early intervention and Academic Intervention Teachers, Technology Specialist, Inquiry Team, Teacher Mentors, Outside Collaborators, i.e. CBOs, Cultural Institutions. We will ensure that all classrooms will be equipped with computers and programs for accessing data. We will effectively identify students in need of academic intervention and provide said intervention through extended day programs, push-in/pull-out, team teaching and early intervention i.e. Reading Recovery, educational assistants and reduced ratio of student to teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will assess student progress in meeting midyear goals. The Inquiry Team, Coaches, Teacher Teams, administration and the ENL Coordinator will analyze results from final unit study projects, running records, Teachers College Reading Writing Performance Assessments, and midyear DRA assessments. Through professional development and Inquiry Team work, MOSL Committee and Coaches, grade committees, formal and informal meetings with teachers, we will plan professional development which will support the faculty in accessing and using data. The assessments will include results on the ELA and NYSESLAT, student work samples and observation of classroom performance, giving the teachers the opportunity to make informed decisions regarding the use of academic assessments to evaluate the effectiveness of the strategies/activities by January 2019. T.C. Mid-year goal: K - entering level A in by mid-year level 1 or 2, 1st grade - if entering on level 4 midyear level 10, 2nd grade - entering at level 16 midyear level 20, 3rd grade - entering level 30 midyear level 34, 4th grade - entering level 38 mid-year 40, 5th grade - entering level 40, mid-year level 47 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By June 2019, more than 50% of the students will show at least one year’s growth on the ELA and/or TCRWP, and at least one third will show up to 1½ year’s growth, with more than 50% of the students in the lowest third of school performance moving up to the second third. The instrument of measure will be the TCRWP. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We will continue to refine our student influenced/teacher guided inquiry-based units of study as a means of supporting the collaborative environment of the school and classrooms. There will be continued professional development for teachers to create multiple entry points on all levels for our students (differentiation of instruction). Further engagement of students will give them multiple opportunities to help develop and create the units of study. We will discuss the Next Generation Learning Standards with students, and through the inquiry-based units of study engage the students in making choices, thus nurturing independence from the early grades. ● i.e., K- students decide where to set up their classroom post office. They develop the skills to comprehend and critique. Students are encouraged to look for challenges and then work collaboratively towards finding a solution. ● i.e., A common practice is for students to write an exit ticket, or to rate their understanding at the end of a lesson. ● i.e., Fourth graders are involved in creating a portrait of successful work, as they work together to design whole-class rubrics. As they work, students use these rubrics to evaluate and improve their own performance. ● . i.e., K- students informed the teacher that the corner was cluttered and that it posed a challenge to the operation of their post office. They then tackled the clutter resulting in an efficient class post office. ● i.e. Push in teachers (Yoga, Tai Chi, Reading Recovery, SPIRE, and Sound Sensible) will support implementation of inquiry-based studies by pushing into the classroom during departmentalization of students as a means of developing a relationship with different children so that each child will have at least two adults they can trust and confide in. We will develop a school-wide grading policy that will align our interdisciplinary studies with the Next Generation Learning Standards and the DOE report card. Students will be a part of the planning process. These rubrics will be translated into native languages, and on-going workshops will help our parents navigate the language of the grading policy. The school-wide grading policy will help facilitate student-led Parent Teachers Conferences. We will also look towards the results of the 2017-2018 School Surveys (Parents, Teachers, and Student) to address any concerns by these members of the P.S. 42 community. 8  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 90% of the students will be able to assess and rate their understanding at the end of their unit study using student-generated rubrics that are aligned with the schools grading policy. At the end of each unit of study, 90% of the students will produce 6 writing pieces: 2 non-fiction, 2 personal narratives, 2 persuasive essays attaining. Students will move up one - two levels from a rating system of 1-4. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will provide cultural experiences that foster integrated teaching/learning, facilitate understanding and language development and increase parental involvement in keeping with research that informs best practice and effective programs for ENLs: theatre arts, collaborations with museums and other institutes for content-based/in-depth study. We will provide interactive, authentic and multi-sensory learning environments that facilitate understanding and language development. We will increase the number of English levels, native language, and age level books and materials in the classroom. Committees will research established grading policies that support the multi-dimensional rigor of interdisciplinary studies. We will provide additional staff to support ENLs and reduce the ratio of students to teacher i.e., additional Bilingual Classes, ICT Bilingual and/or ENL classes, and Push in-Pull-out Teachers for ENL or Native Language support and provide special programs i.e. after school. The funding sources will include Title III and TL Fair Student Funding and Title I School Wide Projects. Each grade will departmentalize for a part of the unit of study offering students an opportunity to select an area of interest to study and to ultimately develop a relationship with another adult in the building. We will ensure participation of families in experimental activities and events, inside and outside of the classroom, initiate excursions to cultural events with Parent Coordinator such as i.e. NY Historical Society, We will facilitate workshops with Parents and Title III teachers, workshops with Parent Coordinator and CBOs, excursions with student and parents to cultural institutions, increase opportunities for parents to volunteer and observe best practices in the classroom. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, ELL Teachers, Support Staff, SBST team September- June ELL Coordinator, Principal, Coaches, Support Services, ENL teacher leaders ELL, SWD September - June ELL Coordinator, Principal, Coaches, Support Services, ENL lead teachers Parents and Family Members, Students September - June ELL Coordinator, Principal, C.B.O.s, Parent Coordinator 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will survey the families and provide workshops to support our families. The survey will be distributed in September which will be used to compile data to guide workshop development. By January 2019 at least 50% of the concerns will be addressed through workshops and outreach. The Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator and the PPT will be responsible for the implementation of this initiative. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will provide additional staff to support ENLs and reduce the ratio of students to teacher i.e., additional Bilingual classes, ICT Bilingual and/or ENL classes, and Push in-Pull out Teachers for ENL or Native Language support and provide special programs i.e. after school. The funding sources will include Title III and TL Fair Student Funding and Title I School Wide Projects. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student surveys created with input from teachers, families, and students will be administered. Students will be able to name two adults they feel that they can confide in and trust. By February 2019 Mid-point benchmark- At least 50%of the students will list at least two adults they can trust in the student survey. Students will be able to articulate and assess their understanding of their first unit of study. School-wide grading policy will be established and published to students and families by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Survey, Student Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Review of the School’s Progress Report, parent, faculty and student information from surveys, feedback from Teacher Teams/Inquiry Teams, classroom inventories, and educational research reveal that in order to help all students become motivated, meet State Standards and for the school to support every student and achieve implementation of the Core Curriculum/Standards, we must engage our teachers in assessment-driven, inquiry-based and differentiated instruction through offerings in professional development that will support them in the classrooms. Our school’s data reveals that student performance and progress has exceeded the city- wide progress for many continuous years. Therefore, we will work toward sustainability and towards supporting teachers in the improvement of practice that will help the students in the lowest third meet standards by June 2019. We will continue to support and improve our Inquiry Base curriculum by engaging teachers in professional development and to provide them with as many opportunities as possible to be students themselves. Ex. Consultants in the field of Reggio, visit sites that support the Reggio method such as The Wonder of Learning Exhibit, professional development with outside institutions such as Museum of Chinese Americans, New York Historical Society, Ellis Island educational program and continued collaboration with NYU. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all teachers will have at least six pieces of evidence of inquiry-based, project-oriented, and differentiated instruction, by assessed needs, abilities/strengths and interests and by Next Generation Learning Standards Curriculum. Of the six pieces, three will be student work samples. Teachers will attain effective to highly effective in Domain 1a, 3b, 3c, 3d based on teacher observations. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The MOSL Committee, Lead Instructional Team, Inquiry Team, Teacher Leaders, faculty and administration will engage in goal setting and planning of professional development. The Principal, Coaches and faculty will visit classrooms regularly to monitor success in differentiated instruction and provide feedback. By October of 2018, the Professional Development Committee and Teacher Teams will review the strengths, successes and needs of our students and of our school and make informed decisions regarding programs and materials that engage students in a rich project based and collaborative process-oriented curriculum and develop student-centered, interactive learning environments which stimulate inquiry, understanding and student ownership. Teacher groups, Administration and Mentors will use assessments to evaluate the effectiveness of programs, strategies and activities. From the onset of the school year, teachers will conduct assessment and planning for differentiation. Inquiry-based, project-oriented activities and differentiated instruction will commence at the onset of the school year and continue throughout the year. Activities will reflect strengths, interests and needs of students. Students will be engaged in organized activities for student leadership. Student “Teams” will have input on decisions regarding instructional programs, goal-setting, school environment and nutrition and which will serve to help students make connections and engage in problem-solving and life-related/authentic learning. We will survey and invite parents to support studies via mini workshops i.e. making dumplings for China Study, create parent field trips with Parent Coordinator, Parent Coordinator Workshops based on survey and parental interest geared specifically towards supporting the learning taking place in the classroom. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers, Support Staff September - June Principal, Reading and Literacy Coach, Lead Teachers Parents, Teachers, Support Staff September - June Parent Coordinator, Principal, Literacy Coaches Parents, Teachers, Support Staff September - June Parent Coordinator, Principal, Literacy Coaches We will continue to refine our studies horizontally and vertically to ensure cohesiveness and common goals across the school. We will ensure parental involvement through workshops and classroom visitations. We will hire consultants who are experts in the Reggio Emilio principles to plan with our teachers and parents. We will continue to reach out to Cultural Institutions for Teachers, Support Staff, Parents, Students September - June Principal, Reading Coach, Literacy Coach, Teacher Leader (Math) 3 Professional Development opportunities. i.e. New York Historical Society for Professional Development with experts who will then visit classrooms. Museum of Modern Art - Professional Development for teachers, students and parents. New Victory Theatre partnership for teachers, students and families. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be a scheduled open class schedule once a month for the different subject areas. There will be formal open houses for the beginning of each unit study nd an end celebration. There will be multiple opportunities for families to volunteer throughout the school year. The use of SchoolCNXT to communicate and share information with the family will be implemented on a weekly basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional activities to include study groups, inter-visitations, lesson study and consultations and collaborations with specialists and institutions will be provided. Scheduling will support these activities and the students’ work toward achieving performance goals Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will be involved in teacher planning of the in-depth study, learning goals, student activities and assessments that will reflect the professional development that has been on-going all school year. The planning will reflect grade goals, sharing of resources and best practices. This will be accomplished through common planning time and professional development that will be built into the school day and during professional development time. By June 2019 teachers will have met the goals outlined in their Initial Planning Conference. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019 teacher observations in the areas of domain 1 and domain 3 will reflect improvement. i.e. developing to effective, effective to highly effective. By June 2019 all classrooms will reflect inquiry-based, project-oriented and differentiated instruction, in accordance with assessed needs, abilities/strengths and interests and in accordance with Common Core Curriculum. The offerings in professional development will reflect teacher input. End of study projects will be collected and reviewed by grade team. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to build trust and lead by example, administration will engage in professional development alongside teachers. Professional development will be structured with input from the different committees within the school. The principal and assistant principal will conduct classroom observations and engage in immediate feedback using the Framework of Teaching as the common language of these conversations. Administration will also support the teachers by allowing for flexible scheduling to facilitate grade planning and professional development. The administration will adhere to an observation schedule in order to provide follow-up support to all teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teachers at their end of the year evaluation will be able to discuss their professional growth and to discuss their next steps for continued professional growth. Teachers who were developing and effective, with the support of mentors and administration will move up to highly effective and effective. The evidence of growth will be measured through teacher observations based on the Danielson Framework. Developing teachers will reach effective/highly effective and effective teachers will reach highly effective. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal and coaches will have beginning of year planning conferences based on the next steps of the individual teacher’s previous end of the year conference. All professional development and planning opportunities will be inclusive of teachers of ENLs and SWD population. Additional support will be reduced class size and the intentional hiring of highly qualified teachers. Support through consultants, universities and institutes will address the needs of the ENL and SWD population. Inter-visitations will be inclusive of standalone ENL, Bilingual, Integrated Co-teaching classes. Teachers, Administrators, the Parent Coordinator and PTA leaders will conduct surveys to gain input from families, and they will work with agencies, CBO’s to plan workshops and other activities for parents throughout the school year, including on how families can support their children. Numerous activities will be planned throughout the year in which parents and students work together in the classroom and outside of the classroom, i.e. learning celebrations and occasions There will be Parent Orientations across grades and multiple opportunities for parents to visit and observe classrooms. There will be flexible scheduling to support Parent Teacher Conferences. Translation services for families will be provided. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September - June Principal, Coaches Teachers September - June Principal, Coaches Parents, Students September - June Principal, Guidance, Support Service Providers, Parent Coordinator and Coaches Parents, Students September - June Principal, Parent Coordinators, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Transparent decision making and open door policy has served the school well. Many decisions are made after consultation with the PTA and SLT. PTA meetings are an important tool where we discuss my role as the school leader. There will be collaborations with CBO's for workshops to promote parent leadership and engagement. There will be at a minimum of two workshops before December 2018 and four by June 2019. The administration, SLT, PTA Board and Parent Coordinator will facilitate this. 6  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will provide additional staff to reduce the ratio of students to teacher, materials and resources to support professional development and collaborative planning time for teachers, and the use of Advance to inform ongoing conversations with teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, professional development and study groups should have addressed at least 50% of the issues that teachers believe they needed support in. By February 2019, at least 50% of classroom observations will be completed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Survey, Professional Development logs, Grade PD logs, PD committee feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 42 will contain to increasing the high level of parental satisfaction, 97% instructional core to 98%, 96% systems for improvement and 96% school culture to 98%. This will be accomplished by continual outreach to families and the community. (based on the 2018-2019 survey) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P.S. 42 will continue to maintain the high level of parental satisfaction and involvement with the aim of once again having 100% of our parents completing the School Survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Orientations will inform parents and after-school programs of early academic interventions such as Reading Recovery, small group academic interventions, the math curriculum and inquiry based learning. All information regarding services will be translated in parent’s native language. We will commit to the intentional hiring for highly qualified individuals that can meet the needs of our families. i.e. ability to communicate in parent’s native language Parents, caregivers and partner CBOs. Parents, caregivers and partner CBOs. We will have mandated Title I meeting, Title III orientation and related services orientation, which will be ongoing. Parents and caregivers September to June Administration, Parent Coordinator, Grade Leaders September to June Administration, Parent Coordinator, Grade Leaders September Administration, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, IEP teacher There will be multiple opportunities thorough out the school year for parents to visit classroom, participate in celebrations and attend performances. Parents, caregivers, and family members September to June Administration, Teachers, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Chinese American Planning Council, YMCA, Asian American Federation, Charles B. Wang Clinic, Immigrant Social Services, Asian Americans for Equality and Hamilton Madison Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Flexible scheduling, translators, translation services, partnering with CBOs to provide support and services to families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all parents and or caregivers would have been invited to at least two school events and have had at least two outreaches by the child’s teacher. SLT generated survey will measure parent satisfaction and invite feedback to help improve the system of parental involvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher logs, Parent Coordinator Workshop logs, Parent Learning Environment Survey, PTA logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Data from ELA, DRA, NYSESLAT, Teacher Observations, Student Portfolios, Writing Samples, Running Records, Teachers College Reading and Writing Performance Assessment Data from SMT, ongoing assessment within Math units, teacher observations Teacher assessment, Teacher observation, Data from 4 th grade State Science exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Interactive writing, Repeated reading, Wilson, Authentic learning experiences through in-depth classroom studies, Peer tutoring, America Reads, S.P.I.R.E., Sound Sensible, Writing Revolution Math strings for fluency, Turn and talk and interactive writing to foster problem solving and explanations of solutions Interactive studies, Group research, Use of visual aid and technology Teacher assessments, teacher observation, Student Portfolios Role play, Use of visual aid and technology Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One to one intervention, Small group, Extended day, Parent involvement through parent engagement time During the school day, after-school. Saturday Academy, Winter and Spring Break Academy One to one intervention, AIS small group, Extended session Small group Small group During the school day, after-school. Saturday Academy, Winter and Spring Break Academy During the school day, after school During the school day, after school At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher referrals, parental referrals, Data from ELA, Math assessments, Teacher observations, Medical referrals Play therapy, Role play, letter or journal writing, Art therapy Small group, one to one intervention, B.P.I.S. During the school day, after school, before school If selected, comfort dog. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Guidance will meet with families and student. Guidance will meet with student if necessary. Peer partner within the classroom. One on One support with Academic Intervention Specialist. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2 Support in necessary school supplies, translation services if needed, academic intervention services. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Highly qualified teachers are grown within the school as they are provided with professional development activities both within the school and institutions of learning so that they can acquire the credentials and licensure to fill positions as needed. In addition, vacancy circulars are drawn up and posted to meet the specific needs of students. Active communication with the MFSC human resource support staff will help find and recruit personnel. Also, the school avails itself of the open market to fill vacancies and recruit personnel. Portions of the school budget are used to support the training of personnel, including at universities and other institutions. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Monthly faculty conferences, grade conferences and workshops will be focused on providing high quality professional development for teachers, educational assistants and other staff and school leaders. Teachers will work with DOE approved consultants and in-house coaches for literacy and math in order to meet Next Generation Learning Standards and to drive the goals of our CEP including inquiry-based learning and differentiation of instruction. Faculty will meet at least once a week during Teacher Team Time to engage in discussion, review of student assessments, lesson study and planning. The Inquiry Team will be supported by the Technology Specialist to facilitate data analysis. Teachers will engage in inter-visitations with providing critical peer feedback. School leaders will conduct regular observations with critical feedback. Teachers participate in weekly, lunchtime study groups with professional literature and/or literacy circles that model strategies for use in classrooms. Teachers will attend workshops at institutes i.e. Lower East Side Tenement Museum. The school will continue with partnerships, such Center for Architecture Foundation, the Guggenheim Museum, Audubon Society, and the New York Historical Society which provide residents/instructors who engage students in learning activities aligned to Next Generation Learning Standards and which provide professional development for teachers. Teachers will attend universities to further their ability to deliver quality instruction and meet student needs, i.e. complete coursework for license extensions and additional certification. When funding permits, the school helps defray costs of their education. Teachers and school leaders will conduct inter-visitations with other schools and attend citywide and network workshops and conferences. Part 3: TA Schools Only 4  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Universal Pre K state funds will be used to help ensure proper staffing, including teachers, and educational assistants , supplies and materials for instruction and for inter-generational programs with families including cultural events and activities, workshops, excursions, i.e. to museums and the theater. Workshops provided will include topics that reflect parental needs and interests. The coordination of Federal, State and Local funds ensure services for students in temporary housing through providers such as counselors. The school will engage in collaborations with community based organizations and other pre-school programs, which include school visits, orientations, and joint planning and professional development and alignment of curriculum and sharing of records and intervention services, i.e. evaluations and recommendation for services. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school has Instructional Teams, such as the Measures of Student Learning Team, FBA team and an Inquiry team, made up of teachers, UFT Leader and school leaders, all of whom review and reflect on the 42 communities' input and make decisions regarding the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures, attend meetings and workshops provided by the MFSC and the DOE. All information will be shared with colleagues and help inform professional development and activities and means to improve instruction. This year there will be a continued school-wide focus on developing a school-wide "Grading Rubric" and "Family handbook." Such input and decision-making is also part of discussions by the schools Pupil Personnel/Inter-visitation Team and the School Leadership Team, which also includes parents. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 5  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 430,812.00 123,976.00 26,702.00 0 3,551,439.00 X X x x X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d 5b, 5d 5a, 5d, 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 6  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 42M in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A , of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 42M will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning, and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can adequately support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about the school and parent-related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills, and cultural competency to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act; 9  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s development; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 42M in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Public School Choice (PSC) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 0  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Next Generation Learning Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards; ● offering high-quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting before December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy, and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 1  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to communicate with limited English speaking parents effectively; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming, respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act; Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives at school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child or discuss what my child is learning each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits on the amount of time my child watch television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer at my child’s school or assist with my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promoting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation, and revision of the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act; Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 3  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale-Based on data culled from the 2017 - 2018 NYESLAT, the success of our interdisciplinary curriculum and the use of authentic experiences have supported our ENL students development in their oral language and fluency in the English language. i.e. In 2017 -2018, K- 46% of our K students assessed in the NYSESLAT are in the expanding and commanding range of English language development, 1st grade-89% of our 1st graders assessed in the NYSESLAT are in the expanding and commanding range, 2nd grade -83% of our 2nd graders the in the NYSESLAT are in the expanding and commanding range, 3rd grade-74% of our third graders assessed in the NYSESLAT are in the expanding and commanding range, 4th grade - 69% of our 4th graders assessed in the NYSESLAT are in the expanding and commanding range and in the 5th grade, 53% of our 5th graders evaluated in the NYSESLAT are in the expanding and commanding range. Commanding Expanding Transitional Emergent Entering 10 35 9 5 1 -Kindergarten 15 32 5 0 1 -First 10 20 3 3 0 -Second 7 22 8 2 0 -Third 1 8 4 0 0 -Fourth 0 9 3 4 1 - Fifth The Title III program is a Social Studies program with a focus on developing oral and written language through authentic learning experiances. The theme will be "What is a community?" Many of our students spend their day in school and then in aftercare or weekend programs. In preparing them for middle school and college readiness the students will be exposed to and experience the diverse resources that make up the surrounding school neighborhood, Chinatown and the Lower East Side. The students will engage in inquiry-based learning activities and explorations that will help them make meaning, solve problems and develop literacy. It will use a multi-sensory approach to facilitate comprehension, promote expression and cooperative learning. It will be child-centered and focused on individual interests, strengths, and needs (these needs will be determined by review of data from the NYSITELL for newly admitted students and the NYSESLAT for our ENL students. Differentiation will be more readily achieved because of the small group size-not more than 12 students per class. The goal is to expose our students to new experiences that are not accessible to them due to their socio-economic situations. By providing a myriad of experiences we hope to fill in the gaps that There will be seven classes from K to 5th grade. The program will be 16 weeks long. From K to 5th grade, there will be multiple trips to local venues. Families will be invited to accompany their child on these excursions. When possible the Parent Coordinator will schedule the trips on alternate schedules for the families when if they are unable to accompany their child during the Title III program. The focus is to promote oral and written language at home because of the shared common experience. The excursions will include local venues that are both culturally familiar or new to the students and families. Venues selected will allow for student tours and hands-on experience. 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Drama and Theatre - To support oral language development the students will plan and stage performances about the shared experiences based on these excursions. To promote student choice the dramatic play will depend on student selections. In past years plays have been staged about folktales based on trips to Museum at Eldridge Street and The Museum of Chinese Americans. Some students recreated neighborhood eateries they have visited such as The Juicy Spot in the form of Mr. Roger's Neighborhood. The audience has been the other Title III classes, in house after school care programs and families. Cooking - Because Chinatown and the Lower East Side has a proliferation of diverse eateries that we can take advantage of cooking has been a highlight of the program. The planning, problem-solving, collaboration of visiting, shopping, reading of a recipe and then partaking as a community has been the most successful in having the students build a diverse coterie of new vocabulary. Literacy - Documentation of the Title three experiences. Many of the students left their countries with few belongings from where they were from. When they immigrate from China they are allowed to bring with them a certain amount of poundage. In many cases, they leave behind many of their mementos and bring only the necessities. We allow the students to use digital cameras to record their learning, printing these pictures for them as a keepsake. They preserve the photos in scrapbooks and document their learning through writing pieces. Technology will be used to support their writing. The teachers plan collaboratively to ensure cohesiveness throughout each grade. These activities are differentiated for each grade and to meet the needs of the students. The language of instruction is English with support in home language to facilitate comprehension. To support the students in their oral and written language there will be a focus in expanding their thinking through the sharing of the experiences during class discussions, small group work and through purposeful documentation. To support targeted reading instruction, the reading recovery teacher will cycle through the classes to provide intervention when students navigate complex text when on excursions, i.e. museums, in class when they are researching for their play or when they are navigating non-fiction text such as reading a recipe. The program will meet once a week for three hours each session for 16 sessions, from October 20, 2018, to March 20, 2019. The program will meet every Thursday from 2:40 - 5:40. This is a necessity and has been requested by many of our families. Over 90% of our students attend an after-school program because their families are unable to leave work to pick them up at dismissal. This is especially true for my Title III students. The three hours are structured to provide ample time for excursions, and projects. This block of time has allowed for in-depth work by students across the grades. The language of instruction will be English with home language support from teachers and the use of technology. There will be 12 students per class. K - 1 class 1st - 1 class 2nd - 2 classes 3rd - 1 class 4th - 1 class 5th - 1 class Each grade will be visiting the cultural institutions, and other businesses in the community such as but not limited to: The Lower East Side Tenement Museum - Play the part of a new immigrant family in 1916 searching for their first home. Get help from Victoria Confino, a 14-year-old immigrant who lives at 97 Orchard Street. Students ask Victoria questions to prepare them for their new lives in America and learn about the universal immigrant experience of starting their lives 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information over. Students will share their story of immigration through their format of choice Community-based i.e., visual or written, culminating in an oral presentation. Cost of the trip -the $636.00 Subject - Interdisciplinary with focus on social studies, non - fiction writing, historical fiction, development of oral language, historical information, community cultural resource and self-expression of own experience through different media forms such as scrap booking, written piece through a graphic novel, poetry, skit... Metrograph Theater - History of independent theatres in the Lower East Side and how the as a way of bringing a piece of their former country to their new home. Viewing short movie clips from a former Italian theatre and Chinese theatres once located in the Lower East Side. Students will be using cameras to film short video clips of their favorite activity or favorite shows from their former country to be shared across grades. Cost of the trip - free Subject - Interdisciplinary with a focus on social studies, historical fiction, development of oral language, historical information, community cultural resource and self-expression through visual retelling The Museum on Eldridge Street - Students will visit the landmark to view architecture. They will sample matzo, spin a dreidel, and enjoy the happy holiday stories of Chanukah (November-December). Students will write, produce and perform skits of how their families celebrate a special occasion. Cost of the trip -the $200.00 Subject - Interdisciplinary with a focus on social studies, non - fiction writing, historical fiction, development of oral language, historical information, community cultural resource and self-expression about places of religion in the neighborhood. Museum of Chinese Americans - Happy Lunar New Year! Through a guided interactive classroom experience, students learn about one of the most important and long-standing holidays for Chinese communities in America and all over the world. How do people prepare for Lunar New Year? What are the meanings behind the various customs? How have Chinese Americans preserved and adapted these customs? What makes the Lunar New Year celebration unique and what makes it universal? Students will journal how their families celebrate the Lunar New Year with a focus of choice. i.e., clothes, food, rituals... Cost of the trip - $216.00 Subject - Interdisciplinary with a focus on social studies, non - fiction writing, historical fiction, development of oral language, historical information, community cultural resource and self-expression through family culture and customs. The early grade students will observe people who are in service to the community or who have businesses in the community and conduct interviews. They will prepare skits and other musical presentations that reflect the different cultures of the community. They will construct alphabet books, photo albums, and informational text of varying genre. Students will create puppets and props that dramatize the topics they are learning, i.e. – in Kindergarten – the family, in first grade – the community, in 2nd grade – New York. Upper-grade students (3 to 5) will also use technology to prepare pictorial documentation, including PowerPoint presentations. The anticipated outcomes will include observable improvement of student performance in reading and oral and written language as well as problem-solving ability and proficiency across the curriculum. There will also be an increase of approximately 2% in the number of students on or above level in the ELA, State Math, and the NYSESLAT. The students invited to the Title III program are identified as Entering to Transitioning levels of proficiency on the NYSESLAT. 8  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our professional development program Teachers to receive training: Eileen Lew/ CB certified & Trained Reading Recovery teacher/Title III Shuk Wong/ TESOL & CB certified 1st-grade teacher/Title III Jessica Lam - TESOL & CB certified teacher/ Title III Emily Choi - TESOL certified/ Title III Nancy Cho - TESOL certified & CB certified/Title III Christine Vaughan - TESOL & CB Certifed/Title III Lezette Riveria - TESOL & CB Certified/Reading Natalia Zhen - Chinese Bilingual & Special Education & CB Professional Development After school PD - 9/24 (3:00-4:00)The Tenement Museum Focus - Collections as a form of self-expression. What do our students collect and what insight does it give us about their lives? All staff/Title III teachers will focus on the different forms of self-expression that they can use in the Title III program Teachers in Title III will learn through the exhibit a new perspective of self-expression that will be used in the interdisciplinary approach of supporting and enhancing the language development of our ENL population. i.e., scrapbooking as a form of documentation supporting vocabulary development, collaboration, TPR activity. After school PD 10/17 (2:40-3:40) - Data Analysis of NYSESLAT- Differentiation of instruction to meet the needs the ENL students - Olga Lipsky/CB & Reading Specialist certified (Assistant Principal) Teachers of ENL students Teachers will learn how to read the item analysis and how this informs planning for instruction. Teachers will review, interpret and analyze their students' data to plan for differentiation of instruction. After school PD 10/15 (2:40-3:40) - Data Analysis of NYSESLAT - Differentiation of instruction in the Title III program - Olga Lipsky/ CB & Reading Specialist certified (Assistant Principal) Teachers of ENL students Teachers will continue to learn how to read the item analysis and how this informs planning for instruction. Teachers will continue to review, interpret and analyze their students' data to plan for differentiation of instruction. interpret After school PD 10/29 (2:40-3:40) - Addressing the needs of our high flyers! Are we challenging our ENL learners? - Stephanie Wu/CB & Special Education certified (Teacher/Reading Specialist) Title III teachers Teachers will learn to develop instructional goals and activities that will support the needs of the bottom 10% and the high flyers. Teachers will learn to plan for differentiation of instruction after data analysis of NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data of the Title III students. 9  Part C: Professional Development All day PD 11/6 (8:30-3:30) - Museum of Chinese Americans "With a Single Step" - Educators private preview of "With a Single Step - Stories in the Making of America" Focus - Providing authentic experiences for our students using the resources in New York. Museum staff, All staff Title III teachers will learn about the historical relevance of the cultural institutions they will be visiting with Title III students. Title III teachers will learn to develop an interdisciplinary social studies unit for the Title III program. i.e., community cultural institutes, Hour PD & After school PD 11/5, 12, 19 (11:55-12:55) 11/26 (2:40 - 3:40) - Title III study group "The Writing Revolution" by Judith C. Hochman Adriana Laraja(Literacy Coach and Mentor) Title III teachers Teachers will learn how to embed targeted writing instruction into the interdisciplinary, project-based approach and the Gradual Release Model of teaching to support and address the needs of their ENL students. After school PD 12/3, 10, 17 (2:40 - 3:40) - Multi -media based projects and programs for ENL learners Allen Ng/CB certified (Technology Specialist) Title III teachers Teachers will learn how to use technology as another forum for the ENL students to engage in the interdisciplinary, project-based curriculum. i.e., Powerpoint presentations Hour PD & After school PD 1/7, 14 (2:40 - 3:40) 2/1, 15 (11:55 -12:55) - Title III study group "The Power of Project" edited by Judy Harris Helm and Sallee Beneke - May Lee/SBL & CB & Multimedia and Technology certified (Principal) Title III teachers Teachers will learn how an interdisciplinary, project-based approach and the Gradual Release Model of teaching to support and address the needs of their ENL students. Afterschool PD 3/6, 20 (2:40 - 3:40) - Meeting the needs of our ENL SWD with IEPs - Hui Ling Chen/Chinese Bilingual & CB & Special Education certified (IEP teacher) Teachers will learn to develop instructional goals and activities that will support the needs of the ENL and SWD students in Title III Teachers will learn to plan for differentiation of instruction after data analysis of NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data of the SWD & ENL Title III students. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III Program will provide ENL instruction focused on non-fiction and content areas particularly based on the topics being studied by their children. The approach will include a focus on engaging all students in authentic learning experiences and specific topics of the curriculum around which language can be developed and problems can be addressed. With the support of the family worker, parents will participate in workshops and conduct visits that help them use their home language to support literacy at home, as well as engage in activities that develop English language proficiency. October 15, 16, 17 (8:30 - 9:15) Parent Workshop - "TC Reading and Writing Assessment and the DRA - What is this and how does it impact the ENL students?" Mary Chan (Parent Coordinator), Rowena Li ( ENL certified, ENL coordinator), Peggy Melone (CB certified, 5th 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities grade teacher), Hui Ling Chin (Chinese Bilingual certified, Special Education certified, IEP teacher) Sally Gu Lai (Chinese Bilingual certified, Special education certified, Kindergarten Chinese Bilingual Special Education teacher) Rationale -To educate families about the purpose of assessments and how it supports differentiation and instruction in the classrooms. October 18 (2:40 - 5:40) Parent Workshop/Inter visitation - "What does the Title III program look like?" Mary Chan (Parent Coordinator) Parents will be invited to sit and observe classes. There will be a Q & A session to address questions and concerns. Rationale - To inform families about the focus and goals of the Title III program October 25 (4:30 - 5:30 )Parent trip to "The Tenement Museum" Mary Chan (Parent Coordinator) Cost of trip $100 Rationale - Providing a shared experience that both, family and student can discuss and reflect at home. November 1 (8:30 - 9:30) - Parent Workshop - "Understanding the New Generation Learning Standard" May Lee (CB certified, Technology Specialist, Principal), Olga Lipsky (CB certified, Reading Specialist, Assistant Principal), Mary Chan (Parent Coordinator) Rationale - Promote parent awareness on how the goals of the Title III program is aligned with the New Generation Standards November (TBA) (3:00 - 4:00) Tour of Metrograph Theater Mary Chan (Parent Coordinator) Rationale - Awareness of neighborhood resources. Collaboration between theatre and school to have a showing of a Chinese movie for families. December (TBA) Parent trip to the Eldridge Street Synagogue Mary Chan (Parent Coordinator) Rationale - Providing a shared experience that both, family and student can discuss and reflect at home. Exposure to different cultures. January 2019 (4:40 - 5:40) - "Inquiry-Based Learning in the Title III Program - Introduce parents to the foundation of what Inquiry-Based Learning looks like in the classroom" Mary Chan (Parent Coordinator), Olga Lipsky (CB certified, Reading Specialist, Assistant Principal) February (TBA) - Parent trip to the Museum of Chinese Americans Mary Chan (Parent Coordinator) Rationale - Providing a shared experience that both, family and student can discuss and reflect at home. March (4:00 - 5:00) - Parent Coordinator/Neighborhood Literacy Walk - Strand Book Store, Barnes and Noble at Union Square, Public Libraries in the neighborhood Mary Chan (Parent Coordinator) Rationale - Many of the families are unfamiliar with the resources in the area that help support language and literacy at home. April (4:00-5:00) - Technology specialist Allen Ng/Parent Coordinator "How to Keep Our Children Safe in the Age of Digital Media" Allen Ng (CB certified, Technology Specialist), Mary Chan (Parent Coordinator) Rationale - To educate families on the importance of Internet safety. All workshops will be in English and native language with the assistance of Mary Chan and the use of technology. Notifications of events will be backpacked home, posted on the school website and text to caregivers via SchoolCNXT. All services named have translation options. 1 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) We are conceptually consolidated.  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name The Benjamin Altman School Borough Manhattan School Number 042 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal May Wong Lee Coach Adriana LaRaja ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Hui Ling Chen Teacher/Subject Area Special Ed-Alexandra Ciervo Teacher/Subject Area ELL Coordinator - Rowena Lee Related-Service Provider Linda Eng York Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Olga Lipsky Coach Adriana LaRaja School Counselor Rachel Yip Leung Parent Ho AuYoung Parent Coordinator Mary Chan Field Support Center Staff Member Yuet Chu Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 0 7 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 4 9 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 7 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 639 Total number of ELLs 234 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 36.62% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Chinese If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 1 4 1 3 1 2 1 K 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 2 5 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 7 0 0 0 0 0 7 1 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessment tools used to assess early literacy skills of ELL's include Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP and Reading Recovery Early Intervention screening. Data from these tools reveal Reading levels, as well as ability and proficiency in different aspects of reading and writing, including vocabulary, literal and inferential comprehension. This data helps inform the school's instructional plan including the organization of students, planning of lessons and collaborations and in determining to staff, including mentorship, professional development, and activities of professional development and activities of parental involvement and support. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 4  Students are assessed periodically for an up to date account of their reading levels. Teachers use the data based on reading levels to plan and improve instruction for ELLs by creating a comprehensive curriculum in math and literacy so that the students are engaged in rigorous academic activities. Teachers meet in small groups for conferences. Workshops are provided for families to demystify assessments, so they are informed of how their child is being assessed in the classroom. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our programs for ELL's is determined by results on the aforementioned assessments, state tests in ELA, Math, and Science, classroom observations, examination student performance, as seen in observations and work samples and surveys of faculty and parents. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers are given the opportunity to look into the data gathered from formative and summative assessments. Literacy coaches work in 6-week cycles with small groups on a weekly basis to cover areas of need. Also, classroom teachers work after school with students in 6-week cycles. The goal is to help students through intensive one-on-one help. Families and caregivers are invited to observe and support their child during these sessions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] School Leadership and teachers using the results of the ELL Periodic Assessments to monitor student progress, check-in on teaching strategies and evaluate practices, plan instruction and professional development and inform conferences and planning with parents and with students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns across proficiency levels, (on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT) and grades reveal an increase in student performance in Speaking Parts. Students still require additional support in Reading and Writing Parts. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Administrators and teachers gather the data for NYSITELL and NYSESLAT during the beginning of the school year to see which areas of need for all ELLs. All information is disseminated during Monday PD's, working lunch sessions and school Google Docs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Staff is organized according to identified levels of students and provided with data on the students as well as information regarding instruction services required for those students. Mandated instructional minutes in ELA, ENL and NLA are provided through Bilingual and Free-Standing ENL classes, Push-In/Pull-Out programs, ENL and ELA through specialty area programs and Team Teaching on grade. This past year, two of our teachers are pursuing additional TESOL certification to ensure that all teachers working with ELL students are all certified. We have served ELL's through a variety of means as described in this document. Additional support is provided by Chinese and Spanish Bilingual educational assistants, student teachers 5  and America Reads and Counts University students. Every effort is being made to recruit and hire additional Bilingual Chinese and ENL Certified Teachers for next year. b. TBE program. If applicable. Transitional Bilingual Education The transitional bilingual education (TBE) programs are designed so that students develop conceptual skills in their home language as they learn English. All instruction is Common Core-aligned to accelerate student achievement. As students (all ELLs) develop English language skills, time in the home language decreases. When ELLs reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT, they are placed in a monolingual class in English with home language supports. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Determinations regarding the number of instruction minutes in ENL (specifically), NLA, ELA and content area instruction in native language are made according to mandates of NYS CR Part 154. Instructional approaches used include balanced literacy, inquiry-based instruction, English Language Approach, Total Physical Response, Readers and Writers Workshop in English or in Native Language as based on the needs of the student, inquiry-based learning, center-oriented and experiential learning and integrated learning. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Stand Alone ENL - Certified TESOL teachers deliver mandated ENL and content instruction to students. Instruction is delivered through a variety of instructional approaches and methods. i.e., Interdisciplinary inquiry-based study, Workshop models for reading and writing, Arts-movement, voice and visual TBE - Certified Bilingual/CB teacher delivers instruction in mandated native language instruction. Instruction is delivered through a variety of instructional approaches and methods. i.e., Interdisciplinary inquiry-based study, Workshop models for reading and writing, Arts (movement, voice and visual ). 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Throughout the year, the LAP team, the PPT team and classroom teachers meet to evaluate and review all services provided to the ELLs to ensure that there is progress made. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students who are in the SIFE group are assessed individually, formally and informally, and instructional programs are provided according to assessed needs include Bilingual Chinese class. Free-standing ENL class, Push-In/Pull-Out Native Language, Academic Intervention ENL, NLA and ELA, Team-Teaching on Grade and Extended School- Day Programs in ENL, ELA and content area, i.e., Math. ELL's in US schools less than 3 years primarily receive Bilingual Chinese instruction in NLA, content area instruction in Bilingual Chinese classes, or through Push-In/Pull-Out, Academic Intervention, Grade Team-Teaching or Extended Day Programs, in which a specific focus for students who have been in the English Language School System at least one year and who must take the ELA will be in English Language Arts.The dominant instructional plan for ELL's receiving service for 4 to 6 years in ENL and ELA; students who are identified as requiring additional support will receive academic intervention during the 6  school day as well as in small group instruction. The dominant instructional plan for Long-Term ELL's, those who have completed 6 years, is ELA with techniques that support ELL's. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use an interdisciplinary inquiry-based approach to provide ELL-SWD access to academic content areas and accelerated English language development. i.e., Students departmentalize to research their inquiry-based studies allowing them to work with non ELL students. This allows the ELL-SWD to be exposed to language with other students and teachers outside of their classes. The ENL teachers use techniques such as deconstructing the complex text, repetition through use of poetry to develop fluency and TPR. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL's identified as having special needs are provided with Bilingual Integrated Collaborative Teaching Classes, Bilingual Chinese/Special Education Academic Intervention Teacher, Bilingual Chinese and Bilingual Spanish Guidance Counselors and Bilingual Chinese Service Providers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted Intervention programs for ELL's in ELA, Math and other content areas are provided according to identification of needs, including classification in ELL subgroups and with information provided through Inquiry Team work. ELL's of 0-3 years receive intervention with bilingual support staff with ample use of the native language and ENL. ELL's of 4-6 years receive intervention with ENL techniques, decreasing amount of native language and increasing amount of differentiated support in ELA and content areas. ELL's who have completed six years receive intervention with ENL techniques as well as increased and differentiated support in ELA and content areas. Bilingual support is provided when needed. Students who reach proficiency in NYSESLAT receive continuing transitional support for at least two years. All instruction reflects techniques, strategies that support second language learners, i.e., authentic learning experience excursions, interactive activities, language development through the arts and collaborations with outside agencies. All teachers participate in professional development in teaching ELL's. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we will continue our programs of dance, music, and theater, which will help develop language and cultural appreciation and which will support learning in the content areas. We will increase our collaboration with a local institution, the Chen Dance Group, and Third Street Music School to support both newly arrived ELL's and transitional ELL's in language acquisition and learning in the content areas, including mathematics. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL's are afforded equal access to all school programs through scheduling, and grade/collegial planning. ELL's attend the normal Extended Day Program as well as the supplemental Title III program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials, including technological equipment and software, are provided through normal school budget as well as through grants and Title III funds. These materials include smart boards, document cameras, desktop computers, and laptops. All students have access to these materials. They are also used to differentiate instruction to targeted sub-groups of ELL's, as well as in ELA, math and other content areas. 7  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language is continually used with all ELL's in decreasing amounts, as determined by careful assessments of students. Chinese-speaking and Spanish-speaking teachers, as well as native language-speaking specialty area teachers and service providers use native language support for individual students when needed. Required service support and resources correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The LAP team/school administration will be a part of the vertical grade planning to ensure that all required services and resources support and correspond to ELL's ages and grades. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials, including technological equipment and software, are provided through normal school budget as well as through grants and Title III funds. These materials include smart boards, document cameras, desktop computers, and laptops. All students have access to these materials. They are also used to differentiate instruction to targeted sub-groups of ELL's, as well as in ELA, math and other content areas. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Collaborations with community-based organizations provide programs that assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year. Support of this kind is also provided to newly enrolled early childhood students and their families through workshops and referrals. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school started a Spanish program for all students including ELLs, where students will gain exposure to a variety of languages. In addition, giving ELLs the opportunity to learn another language will allow for them with language acquisition. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Inclusion of all teachers of ELLs in all professional development Study groups for ELL personnel to further enhance their teaching Intervisitations to schools with a similar population to observe best practices Professional development at cultural institutions i.e. Museum of Chinese Americans Consultants - workshops Collaborations with CBOs and universities i.e. New York University, Charles B. Wang Clinic Planning time to align curriculum to Common Core Learning Standards 8  Professional literature to support alignment of curriculum i.e. Strategies That Work: Teaching Comprehension to Enhance Understanding by Stephanie Harvey Mentor support through consultants 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Support for Staff to assist ELL's in the transition to Middle School. - Professional Development meeting at District level for staff involvement in the Middle School process. - Parent Coordinator assists in scheduling visits to schools. - Staff accompanies parents and students to school visits. - Translation services are provided in different dialects. - Intervisitation arranged for teachers to visit target Middle Schools. - DOE key people invited in to speak to parents, students and staff about Middle School choices. - Workshops for parents to help them become familiar with technology to access information about their children and the school. - Workshop for teachers to assist them in the Middle School process. - Guidance Counselors and other service providers hold workshops to help parents and students make informed choices, especially our students with special needs. Study Groups focusing on the ELL Student - Distribution and discussion of professional literature focusing on the ELL student. - Workshops: Hunter College, Study Groups with other schools serving the same population, DOE, - In-school Workshops - Technology - Math Leaders - Literacy Coaches - - Provide support and Professional Development in the Specialty areas - Intervisitations within the school and to other schools - Speakers ex. district ELL support services - Collaborations with Universities NYU Tesol, NYU Steinhardt CCNY CUNY Brooklyn College CUNY Hunter College - Collaborations with Cultural Institutions Ex. Museum of Chinese American Eldridge Street Synagogue Midori & Friends Dancing Classrooms H.T. Chen Dancers Lower East Side Tenement Center for Architecture Foundation Audubon Society New Victory Theater Drawing Center Collaboration with teaching artist/sharing experiences Grade Meetings - looking/discussing professional literature Inquiry Team Work - the teaching of ELL's Faculty Conferences 9  Per Session Afterschool Workshops - Math Leaders Literacy Coaches Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Meetings will be conducted during the parent engagement time. There will be flexible scheduling to accommodate parents' work schedule. A translator will be available for all meetings. There will also be flexible methods of outreach to parents i.e. email, phone conferences, in-person meetings and letters. All meetings will be documented in a log and kept in child's cumulative folder. In addition, the school will hold parent meetings to demystify assessments (DRA, TC, math) so they are informed of how their child is being assessed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator organizes workshops/trips for families to foster family involvement. Past trips have been to cultural institutions that their child had visited during the school year. i.e., New York Historical Society, Museum of Natural History, Museum of Chinese Americans. Families are encouraged to join class trips. Past workshops - Health and Wellness workshops with Charles B. Wang and New York Presbyterian Hospital - Health and Hygiene with NYU Dental School - Understanding I.E.P's with Chinese Bilingual School Base Support Team - Museum of Chinese Americans - New Victory Theater - Midori and Friends/Chen Tao Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, May Lee, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Benjamin Altman School DBN: 02M042 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) May W. Lee Olga Lipsky Mary Chan Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Hui Ling Chen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ho Au Yeung Parent Alexandra Ciervo Teacher/Subject Area Rowena Lee Teacher/Subject Area Adriana LaRaja Rowena Lee Coach Coach Rachel Yip Leung School Counselor Bonnie LaBoy Maria Boughton Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: P.S. 42M Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy DBN: 02 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Rowena Lee ENL/Test Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1.The means used to assess needs in written translation and oral interpretation include but are not limited to review of data obtained from the Home Language Information Survey and DOE Language Preference Letter; the Environmental Survey and the Progress Report; surveys conducted through the school, PTA ; and feedback from the Parent Coordinator and the SLT. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 3  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Chinese English Spanish Bengali 772 209 6 1 78.14 21.15 0.61 0.1 274 207 5 0 27.73 20.95 0.51 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families Monthly - Grade Newsletter, Principal's Newsletter, PTA Updates, PS 42 Website Bi-Monthly Workshops Handouts Invitations to Celebrations General Overview of Grade Specific In-Depth Studies Grade Newsletter After School Program Information Monthly - Grade Calendar Assessment Information -DRA2, TC, ELA, Math, Science, Class Rubrics plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation provided by native language translator. Written notices will be posted on the school website where the families will have access to Google Translate. The school also uses SchoolCNXT a messaging 4  app to communicate with families. The app has been set up by school staff to automatically translate into the guardians preferred language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Teachers Conferences Weekly Family Engagement Conferences Assessment Workshops Title III Family Trips Classroom Trips Daily Guidance Conference Daily Pupil Personnel Issues with PP Secretary plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Translators on staff provide translation services. The use of The Big Word when there are no translators available. The family requiring Bengali translation can speak English but when necessary the school uses the DOE Translation Services. Four times during the school year. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 5  The school uses a messaging app SchoolCnXT which has been set up in the guardian's preferred language. The school also uses the NYC DOE Translation Services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff has the technology to use SchoolCNXT to share all communication with families in their preferred language. All staff members have the information and access to use the NYC DOE translation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 3. In keeping with Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 written and oral parental notification, translation/interpretation will be provided in the primary languages of the families. Translation and interpretation is provided by staff for all correspondence and communication between the school and the family, including throughout each day – in the administrative office(s), at admission and dismissal, in classrooms and in the medical room. All information or documents provided by the DOE are distributed in a timely manner. As needed, parents are consistently assisted in communicating with the school or other branches of the DOE. For example, a non-English speaking parent who can only write in Chinese will be assisted in obtaining translation to a letter for any branch of the DOE. Signs in the prominent covered languages of the school are conspicuously posted i.e. safety procedures, student and parent rights, including regarding translation, interpretation services and mechanisms for obtaining assistance. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PTA Surveys - All surveys are translated SLT Surveys - All surveys are translated Principal Outreach - Use of translators Translated parent surveys are available on the Translation and Interpretation Unit's Intranet page. 6 
