 02M051 School Name: P.S. 051 ELIAS HOWE Principal: STEPHANIE LUKAS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS51- The Elias Howe School 02M051 NA Pre-K to 5 School Number (DBN): 525 West 44 th Street New York, NY 10036 212-315-7160 212-315-7165 Phone Number: Fax: Dana Shatten dshatten@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 2 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Stephanie Lukas Shani Perez Lilibeth Feliciano Liz Pearson Melissa Mercado NA NA NA District Information Bonnie LaBoy Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-435-5585 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue New York, NY 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Stephanie Lukas Shani Perez LilibethFeliciano/Melissa Mercado Elizabeth Pearson Danielle Murgolo Deanna Kartez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher/Chairperson: 3rd grade Member/Teacher: 2nd Grade Member/Teacher: Kindergarten   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jason Brown Mike Evers OwaisPirzada Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Elka SamuelsSmith Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our school’s mission reflects our purpose and deep commitment to creating meaningful, integrated learning experiences for the diverse population of students at P.S. 51.   “As a family of learners, P.S. 51 strives to create a supportive learning environment that encourages academic and emotional success, developing the whole child through integrating a rigorous academic curriculum, the arts, and surrounding diverse community.” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 51, the Elias Howe School located in the heart of Hell’s Kitchen on 44 th Street and 10 th Ave in Manhattan is a zoned community school of 450 students that services a diverse student body from over 35 countries. Our school offers a comprehensive arts program through our art and music teachers, as well as many arts partnerships and additional social studies, science, and character education partnerships to provide a holistic and enriching education for all the students at P.S. 51. Our curriculum focuses on children working and collaborating together in engaging learning that includes inquiry, projects, science experiments, trips and a wide range of experiences. Our curriculum of interdisciplinary studies accommodates the wide range of students academically by modifying and differentiating instruction so that all children can achieve their highest potential. We are proud of the enrichment activities we provide for students in the arts, clubs, and extra-curricular activities that include trips related to social studies, science and inquiry studies. We have adopted the Teachers College Reading and Writing project curriculum and the Eureka Math program available on EngageNY.org. Our school focuses on and celebrates our cultural diversity through academics and the arts. The arts play an integral part in building social and emotional skills. The visual arts program builds skills such as problem solving, critical thinking, imagination, observational skills, confidence through self-expression, and so much more. Our music program combines elements to create our unique child-centered curriculum that builds on the content knowledge, appreciation and performance skills through the years. Students at P.S. 51 can participate in the chorus, Orff, recorder ensembles, guitar, ukulele, cello, and fashion club during or after the school day. Teachers, staff, SLT, and our parent coordinator provide monthly workshops on curriculum, and social emotional topics during parental engagement, and Family Fridays. We also have family events that include movie night, sports, talent show, arts benefit and pot luck dinners throughout the course of the school year. We have a comprehensive social emotional program. The school has monthly character values where teachers and staff read books on the value of the month and conduct activities in the classrooms to foster discussion about the value targeted for the month. We also have a peer mediation program where 4 th and 5 th graders apply and are selected to be peer mediators for the students during the recess of students in Grades K-2. Peer mediators receive training and are supervised by the school psychologist, supervising school aide, social worker and SAPIS worker. In addition, our students in grades 3-5 participate in numerous community service programs. One program includes maintaining sustainability practices in our school building: monitoring electricity use, recycling, and reducing food waste in the cafeteria. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  We provide a rigorous instructional program differentiating instruction to meet the needs of all our students that includes 11% English Language Learners and 22 % Special Education Students. The school population is comprised of 14.14 % Black,43.92 % Hispanic, .99% Hawaiian Pacifican Islander, 20.84 % Asian students, 1.48% Multi-racial and 18.61% White. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. This past school year, for our CEP goals, we focused on collaborative teacher teams working on student to student discussion in math. Based on Advanced Teacher Evaluation system, teachers needed more guidance and support in component 3B questioning and discussion across all content areas. Another key area for focus this year is component 3d, using assessment in instruction. In prior years, we had worked on developing academic language, and extending student to student discussion in reading to support our English Language Learners and Special Education students. Even though we have 11% English Language Learners, we have many students who were former ELLs. We also focused on strengthening family-community ties in the past school year by increasing parental engagement in workshops, activities and events. Our third goal was to have students in grades K-2 move up two levels in reading on the Fountas and Pinnell assessment that is conducted four times a year. We have made significant progress in these three goals. For 2017-18 our key areas of focus are: to further develop parental engagement, plan and implement professional learning communities, develop student self-assessment in writing, increase math scores and improving attendance and lateness. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M051 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 453 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 19 15 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 58.0% % Attendance Rate 56.1% % Reduced Lunch 7.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 45.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 17.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.25 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 47.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 66 66 91.2% 0.4% 19.9% 15.9% 17.9% 3.1% 0 0% 6.9 41.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools by focusing on the element of Rigorous Instruction. We analyzed many quantitative data sources and data trends and summarized the most significant student performance trends based upon our New York City Quality Review Feedback. ● Data Source- NYS ELA Exam ● Based on a review of the most current qualitative and quantitative data, and input from all members of the SLT team, we have identified the need for students to reflect on their reading to set targeted learning goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through dedicated strategy-based reading and writing instruction, 70% of students who have been continuously enrolled from September 2018 in kindergarten to fifth grade will demonstrate an increase in literacy performance by June 2019, as measured by running records. Students in grades K-2 will increase at least 2 reading levels and students in grades 3-5 will increase at least 1 reading level. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● School leaders will ensure that sufficient planning time is provided to implement the necessary modifications to the curriculum, and the TC Literacy Consultants will participate in the planning sessions to ensure alignment. Grades K-5 teachers and TC Lit Consultants September 2018-June 2019 ● Our Universal Literacy Coach will work with teachers on grades K-2 to develop literacy pracices with an emphasis pn small group differentiated instruction. ● Our SETSS teacher as well as our special education teachers in grades 2-5 classrooms will participate in a Professional Learning Community that is scheduled to meet on Mondays, every two weeks throughout the school year. The study group will help create self-assessment tools to foster students’ ability to create appropriate goals and strategies to meet them. September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Grades K-2 teachers, Universal Literacy Coach Grades k-5 teachers, facilitators, and SETSS teacher School Leaders School Leaders School Leaders ● n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator and classroom teachers will hold a series of parent workshops designed to increase parent’s capacity to assist their children at home in writing. These workshops will be repeated during the school day and evenings to accommodate parents’ busy schedules. Translation and interpretation will be used to improve communication between our schools and families Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per session hours from planning, curriculum development and data analysis ● Per diem days to hire substitutes who will cover classes so that classroom teachers can collaborate and participate in inter-visitations in model classrooms 4  ● Materials for parent workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, the teachers will conduct another round of running records to determine who is on the way to meeting the goal (K-2 already moved one reading level and 3-5 approaching the next reading level) and who needs additional support. As of February 2019- We have begun our third round of whole school running records. More than 75% of students who have been continuously enrolled have made progress of at least one level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers College Running records will be the primary tool. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools by focusing on the element of Supportive Environment. We analyzed many quantitative data sources and data trends and summarized the most significant student performance trends based upon our New York City Quality Review Feedback. ● The growing and changing community should be reflected in the mission statement Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the SLT with input from all stakeholders will revise the school's mission statement to better reflect the school as a whole. The majority of stakeholders will decide on the final version. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● The SLT will begin drafting a new version of the mission statement. ● The revised misssion statement will be shared at a PTA meeting and a staff meeting. ● Classroom teachers wil create a "kid-friendly" misssion statement with students N/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? SLT Septemebr 2018 -June 2019 Septemebr 2018 -June 2019 Administration, PTA exec board teachers, students Septemebr 2018 -June 2019 SLT members, all stakeholders, parents, students SLT members, all stakeholders, parents, students SLT members, all stakeholders, parents, students N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The PTA exec board will conduct outreach to gather feedback on the mission statement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monthly SLT meetings will include the mission statement on the agenda. Teachers who wish to work after hours can be compendated through per-session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 the SLT should have a draft of the mission statement ready to present to the rest of the community. As of February 2019- a draft of the mission statement is ready to be shared at the next PTA meeting and will be presented for feedback and any final revisions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Feedback on the mission will be gathered at SLT meetings, PTA meetings and staff mettings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools by focusing on the element of Collaboration Teachers. We analyzed many quantitative data sources and data trends and summarized the most significant student performance trends based upon our school created teacher survey. ● Data Source- Teacher Survey ● Findings: Our teachers completed a school survey to gather feedback on teachers’ areas of strength as well as areas in which they wanted additional support to grow and improve. A majority of teachers indicated the need for additional support for students and math. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the third grade students will improve at least 15% from the baseline assessment to the final end of year assessment. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● The Principal and Assistant Principal will monitor the progress of the math development by participating in at least one meeting each month, in order to ensure that the team meets its goal of increasing their content knowledge in order to improve student's scores. School Leaders ● School Leaders will ensure that sufficient planning time is provided to implement the necessary modifications to the curriculum, and math lead will participate in the planning sessions to ensure alignment. ● The school will partner with the Math Collective to develop more inquiry based lessons to complement the computational curriculum. School Leaders, classroom Grades 3-5 Grades K-5 teachers,  The school will implement the Eureka Math Curriculum school-wide from K-5. All Students and teachers School Leaders School Leaders School Leaders School Leaders September 2018-November 2019 September 2018- November 2019 September 2018- November 2019 September 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School personnel will organize opportunities for parents to be increase their understanding of this goal. These opportunities will include invitations to serve on various committees, attend parent meetings/workshops, and to volunteer for activities in the school. The SLT will participate in a Learning Walk in early November to connect the CEP goals with the actual work in the classrooms. Later in the year, the SLT will engage in additional activities to further build their capacity to work in the school Our PTA and Parent Coordinator will regularly communicate with parents in order to inform them of opportunities to participate Per session hours will be provided to school staff to compensate their time planning for events, developing curriculum, and analyzing data. 0  Substitutes will be hired to cover classes so that classroom teachers can collaborate and participate in inter-visitations in model classrooms (planning days). Materials for math and literacy planning will be purchased. Teachers will implement the materials in their practice as well as plan for curriculum workshops for parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per session hours from planning, curriculum development and data analysis ● Per diem days to hire substitutes who will cover classes so that classroom teachers can collaborate and participate in inter-visitations in model classrooms ● Materials for math planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, the math teachers will have created differentiated materials based on the results of the mid module in order for students to improve on the lacking skills for the end of unit performance assessment. As of February 2019 the third grade math teachers have attended several Math Collective PDs and are hosting the next round of lesson study. They collect and use the module data to plan for small groups. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-module benchmark will be using the exit tickets to notice struggles before the mid module performance assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school conducted a comprehensive needs assessment aligned with the Framework for Great Schools by focusing on the element of Effective School Leadership. We analyzed many quantitative data sources and data trends and summarized the most significant student performance trends based upon our school created teacher survey. ● Data Source- Teacher Survey ● Findings: Our teachers completed a school survey to gather feedback on teachers’ areas of strength as well as areas in which they wanted additional support to grow and improve. Almost half of teachers indicated the need for additional support in collaboratively differentiating and modifying instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Based on the MTOP: Measures of Teachers Observation Practice feedback, and June 2019 teacher Reflections/Surveys school leaders will support and implement professional development around the topic of small group, differentiated instruction. As measured by observation, teacher notes, class data, and building walkthroughs 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● School Leaders will ensure that sufficient planning time is provided to implement the necessary modifications to the curriculum, and the PLC facilitators will participate in the planning sessions to ensure alignment. Staff developers will provide professional development sessions for all teachers. The overarching goal of the PD series is to increase teachers’ pedagogical knowledge around the instructional shifts reflective of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and their implications for instruction of our students. The team will also work together to create a school wide rubric for evaluating the CCLS alignment of the newly created units and performance tasks. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Leaders School Leaders September 2018-June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 School Leaders, teachers and service providers School Leaders, teachers and service providers ● The Principal and Assistant Principal will monitor the progress of the Professional Learning Communities development by participating in two meetings each month, in order to ensure that the team meets its goals. School Leaders September 2018-June 2019  Observations will have a focus on small group differentiated instruction to target particular learniong needs School leaders, teachers and providers September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders School Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. ● Curricular materials (student text and documents) to supplement our curriculum ● Frequent parent workshops ● Increased parent involvement in the school and classroom ● Increased home/school communication 3  ● Professional texts for PLCS ● Creation of a Professional Calendar for 2017/2018 on which school staff record planned activities/workshops involving parents (each teacher has individualized calendar) ● Principal and Assistant Principal oversee all efforts Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Curricular materials (student text and documents) to supplement our curriculum ● Professional texts for PLCS Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, every teacher will have had at least one observation or PD cycle with a focus on small group differentiated instruction. As of February 2019 every teacher has had at least one observation where small group work was seen, or PD was provided to support the teacher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark are teacher lesson plans and room environment that includes charts or systems to insure small group instruction is in place. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Now that the school has permanently settled back into its zoned neighborhood, we plan to improve our involvement by providing ongoing opportunities for parent and family education. An improved home/school connection will have a positive impact on overall student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will conduct a series of at least 3 parent workshops based on need and interest. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Leaders September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, School Leaders, Classroom Teachers,c Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Communicate various activities to encourage parental involvement: 1. Title 1 parent workshops based on interest expressed by parents, strengthening home/school connection. 2. Teachers College literacy consultant will conduct a parent workshop 3. SLT/PTA developed survey to gather data on workshop interest 4. There will be class parent meetings where class parents meet to talk about how to mobilize parental involvement in the classroom. 5. Pre-K social worker runs targeted early childhood workshops 6. Library Training- parents volunteers are trained on how to support students in the library 7. Committees- Library, Gardening, and Website. Parents are encouraged to participate in committees based on personal interests and expertise 8. Pre-K, K welcome breakfast- provides an opportunity for new families to familiarize themselves with school and other parents 9. School Website- provides an up to date communication system for parents to access school wide information 10. Parental Involvement on Tuesdays- teachers will hold workshops and meet with individual parents to discuss strategies that can be used at home 11. Publishing Parties as well as Interdisciplinary Learning Fairs- parents are invited to come in to share and celebrate student work 6 N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/A If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Materials for parental workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, school leaders will check sign in sheets and feedback forms to provide data on attendance and workshop effectiveness in order to deteremine if the high interest topics are encouraging more parents to participate. As of February 2019 the parent workshop survey was conducted and the data gathered was used to plan for several workshops. We have already had 3 parent workshops and have plans for three more. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure used to assess progress towards meeting the mid-point benchmark are the sign-in sheets and feedback forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grades on class assessments and state tests, student work products and projects Grades on class assessments and state tests, student work products and projects Grades on class assessments and state test, student work products and projects Grades on class assessments, student work products and projects Emotional or social needs as identified by teacher or other school personnel, service determined by Pupil Personnel Team Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading Recovery, Reading Rescue, Fundations, Just Words, Great Leaps, Guided Reading, Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention System and Wilson Guided practice, increased conferencing, extended time , graphic organizers, ECAM based math centers Guided practice, increased conferencing, extended time, graphic organizers Guided practice, increased conferencing, extended time, graphic organizers At-risk counseling, social groups Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to-one During the school day Small group, one-to-one During the school day Small group, one-to-one During the school day Small group, one-to-one During the school day Small group, one-to-one counseling During the school day 8  9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We plan to provide the following services to the STH population: 65 students  At-risk counseling provided by our guidance counselor and/or SAPIS Prevention staff member   Socialization groups provided by SAPIS Prevention staff member School supplies, books and backpacks Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 65 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0 We will provide at risk counseling, socialization groups, and purchase and distribute backpacks with school supplies and books. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 7,500 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. Interviews are conducted and teacher candidates implement demonstration lessons. 2. Many teacher candidates have done their student teaching fieldwork in our school or have been referred or recommended by current or former teachers and staff in the school. The support we offer student teachers is extensive and includes monthly meetings as well as opportunities to participate in mock interviews 3. A thorough review of credentials is done prior to hiring. 4. Mentor/mentee relationships are created to support new teachers 5. School leadership sets up One to One Meetings frequently with new teachers 6. New teachers participate in regular Progress Meetings with School Leadership 7. Professional Learning Communities are formed to support all staff, including new teachers 8. Teachers attend frequent professional development 9. New teachers are involved in frequent instructional conversations based on formal and informal observations 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. Teachers attend workshops outside of school including, but not limited to, New Teacher Workshops, RAMAPO training, TRIBES workshops 2. Teachers work with District Support staff in areas of ESL, Math, and Special Education 2  3. Teachers participate in professional development conducted by network content specialists in science, math, literacy, special education and English as a Second Language. 4. According to the BEDS survey, 100 % of our teachers are certified /highly qualified and in the right position. Each new teacher is mentored 2 periods a week. 1 period is push-in and the other is a meeting in which the teacher and mentor reflect on classroom observations/work as well as plan for upcoming units and lessons. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 1. Outreach is done to community preschools. 2. Monthly tours and open houses provide families an opportunity to tour the school and hear about the programs and curriculum. 3. All Pre-K will participate in PLCs in collaboration with universal Pre-K. 4. We will conduct monthly workshops with a social worker who specializes in Pre-K. Topics will include discipline, routines, and self esteem. 5. Teachers will hold workshops 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 3  1. The Academic intervention teams meets to discuss student needs and curricula and materials to support them. 2. The Instructional Leads meet with teachers to ascertain classroom needs based on observations and assessments. 3. The Teacher Team facilitators meet with teachers to evaluate school wide needs in order to create an action plan. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 176,927 22,722 12,366 2,323 2,477,328 X X X NA X Column B Section Reference(s) 5-6 5-6 5-6 5-6 5-6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 4  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 51 The Elias Howe School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 51- The Elias Howe School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 6  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 7  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 51- The Elias Howe School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 8  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 9  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act; Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 0  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 1  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Description: Based on 2018 NYSESLAT scores, as well as the 2018 NYS ELA scores, ELLs in grades 2-5 will be targeted for the Title III after school program. NYSESLAT scores show that students in these grades need further support in all four modalities (reading, writing, listening, and speaking), but particularly in writing. 2018 NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores indicate 11 total entering students, 12 emerging, 4 transitioning, and 8 expanding students. Of the 30 ELLs invited to participate, subgroups will be created based on NYSESLAT test scores, NYS ELA scores, and teacher observations of writing/reading abilities. One subgroup will consist of “entering” and “emerging” students, while the other subgroup will consist of “transitioning” and “expanding” students, with one ENL teacher leading each group. These two ENL certified teachers will run the program, one of whom also holds a common branch 1-6 teaching license. Instruction will be conducted in English, using ENL methodology to support the many languages represented by the student body. The goal of the after school program is to develop literacy and academic writing in our ELLs. Direct instruction will be provided around comparative writing through a “world communities” theme, related to the Social Studies Scope and Sequence 3rd grade study of communities in Africa, Asia, South America, The Caribbean, Middle East, Europe, Southeast Asia, Oceania or Australia. Students will compare and contrast the communities of their home countries to those of their classmates, using compare and contrast words, as well as other academic vocabulary. In order to teach the culture and geography of each country’s community, we will order an “all about” countries book series from Amazon.com, using Title III funds. The book series is titled, “Ready to Read: Living in…” by Chloe Perkins. Title III funds will also be used to purchase 4 iPads, on which students will write digital and visual comparative and contrastive writing pieces in small groups. Additionally, the funds will cover the cost of writing and publishing materials, such as page protector sheets and small binding folders. The program will be supported by three walking trips in the local community. Students and teachers will visit such places as Gulliver’s Gate (a museum that allows visitors to explore cities and regions from continents around the world), and two local cultural restaurants. During the trip to Gulliver’s Gate, students will learn about the geographical features of different countries and take pictures using the newly purchased iPads for their subsequent writing pieces. During the other two walking trips, students will tour a Middle Eastern restaurant and a Latin American restaurant, within walking distance of our school to learn about the food, language, music, and other cultural features of those world regions. The program will run from 2:35pm-4:35pm on the following Wednesdays and Fridays: January 16, January 18, January 23, January 25, January 30, February 1, February 6, February 8, February 13, February 15, February 27, March 1, March 6, March 8, March 13, March 15, March 20, March 22, March 27, March 29, April 3, April 5, April 10, April 12, and April 17. 4  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development: The ENL teachers will participate in a study group on Wednesdays from 4:35-5:35pm from January 16th through February 13th for 5 sessions. Classroom teachers will be invited to attend as well, but only the ENL teachers will be paid per session through Title III funds. During the study group, teachers will learn strategies that will support the ELLs in their classrooms by reading the book, “50 Strategies for Teaching English Language Learners (3rd edition) by Herrel & Jordan. Each week will be dedicated to a different chapter. Teachers will also view a short video reviewing the strategies that have been read and discuss the implications for ELLs. January 16: Chapter 1: Predictable Routines and Signals Reducing Anxiety p. 16-19 View Video: Predictable Routines and Signals January 23: Chapter 9: Academic Language Scaffolding: Supporting Students Use of Language in Academic Settings p. 56-61 No video January 30: Chapter 11: Total Physical Response: Integrating Movement into Language Acquisition p. 69-72 View Video: Manipulative Strategies February 6: Chapter 15: Partner Work: Practicing Verbal Interaction p. 88-93 No video February 13: Chapter 22: Integrated Curriculum Projects: Using Authentic Projects to Bring Knowledge Together p. 134-139 View Video: Cooperative Learning Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Parental Engagement Activities: Parents and families will be invited to attend an introductory session prior to the start of the Title III after school program on January 8th during parental engagement time at 2:45pm until 3:45pm. The introductory session will be provided by the two ENL teachers, who will give parents information about the Title III after school program, explain topics to be covered, and teach parents strategies that they can use to support their child’s English language development at home. On the last day of the after school program, we will hold a culminating showcase to share students’ writing pieces and experiences with families. Additionally, the two ENL teachers will compile a pamphlet for parents that includes a list of local social studies-related museums to attend with their child on weekends to strengthen students’ academic knowledge in social studies. The ENL teachers will call local museums to request free passes for families and informational flyers to distribute to parents. A final parental engagement activity will familiarize families of ELLs with the demands of the NYS exams throughout three informational sessions to be held on March 5th, March 12th, and March 19th from 2:35-2:45pm. Interpretation and translation services will be available to parents in their home language through the Department of Education language and translation phone service and/or with the help of our bilingual staff members. This engagement activity will be at no cost to Title III, as teachers will not be paid per session during this hour. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name The Elias Howe School Borough Manhattan School Number 51 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ryan Bourke Coach Dana Goldberg ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lauren Sboto Teacher/Subject Area Lauren Murynec Teacher/Subject Area Ayellet Moas Related-Service Provider Allison Levine/SETTS Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Dana Goldberg Coach Angela Beckham School Counselor Denise Capasso Parent Martina Hornakova Parent Coordinator Giselle Leon Field Support Center Staff Member Vera Tang Other (Name and Title) Emily Tomack C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 447 8 Total number of ELLs 43 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 9.62%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools PS51 staff use to plan the instructional program for our ELLs include, but are not limited to the following: Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System (Grades K-5), Expeditionary Learning Assessments (beginning, middle, and end-of-unit), informal running record assessments with miscue, accuracy, and fluency analysis, student-teacher conferences, on-demand writing, as well as various language-based math assessments. Running records over various years are used to examine previous history and make comparisons of how much progress has been made over any given period of time. This analysis provides us information about students' phonemic awareness, lexical ability, reading comprehension, and fluency. This information helps inform our school's instructional plan by providing the reading levels of ELLs, from which we are able to form appropriate guided reading groups. Additionally, the benchmarks these assessments provide for student vocabulary and spelling development, can be used as a guide for the differentiation of students' learning activities. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 9  The ENL teacher and classroom teachers monitor, review, and analyze the assessment data at quarterly progress meetings. In addition to the Progress Meetings, PS51's Academic Intervention Team (AIT) meets regularly to discuss the progress and/or concerns of students, including our ELL population. Based on the team's recommendation, teachers are able to implement strategies and interventions in the classroom. Furthermore, frequent teacher/provider articulation time is allotted on a monthly basis (Morning Breakfast Club). PS51 teachers and staff have also organized themselves in Professional Learning Communities to pursue lines of inquiry related to the achievement of sub-groups of students, including our ELL population. The findings of these PLCs are shared with the staff at large twice yearly. We also have dedicated opportunities (e.g., November 7 PD Day) to analyze student data and develop findings for sub-groups of students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the NYSESLAT, ELA, Fountas and Pinnell reading levels and ELL assessments, and parent involvement to determine to the success of our programs for ELLS. We examine data and personal records kept by both the ENL teacher and classroom teachers. We also use the increase in students’ reading levels throughout the year and in class assessments to determine students’ success rates and the efficiency of our programs. An additional tool we use to determine success rate of our ELLs is AMAO. P.S. 51 is monitoring the progress of discussions and questioning of ELLs by using teacher made rubrics according to the common core and Danielson Framework. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher participates in all Academic Intervention meetings where interventions are chosen and monitored bi-monthly. Follow up meetings are held in which the team (and teacher) are able to assess progress. As a part of the AIT process, team members will observe students in the classroom setting in order to assess the effectiveness of the interventions. The team compiles lists of effective interventions (If... Then.. format) that is able to be used by other pedagogical staff. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5) by analyzing the results from various formative assessment sources, including Fountas and Pinnell Assessments and State exam scores as well as end of unit and baseline assessments in ELA and math. The data is analyzed at grade meetings and dedicated "data" meetings in order to notice patterns and trends. The information gleaned from our data meetings/discussions is shared between teacher teams, at grade meetings, and Academic Intervention Team meetings to determine the appropriate instructional modifications for ELLs. We also use data from the ELA and Math state exams to group students according to their level for small group instruction in both the stand-alone ENL and classroom setting. Content area teacher recommendation is a source of data used to guide instruction within RtI by placing students in programs such as Math RtI groups, Guided Reading groups by our literacy coach and Wilson Just Words. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Various outcome assessments (NYSESLAT, State Exams) are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. Based on meetings in which data is analyzed, decisions that pertain to our ELL instructional program can be made. For example, the data patterns across proficiency levels (on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT) and grades indicate that students have the greatest difficulty making the transition from the advanced level to the proficient level on the reading/writing section of exams. Students seem to be mastering listening/speaking skills at a rapid pace and tend to plateau in reading/writing upon reaching the upper grades. The common trend across all grades is difficulty in developing academic language and literacy skills. Over twenty percent of our students scored proficient in listening and speaking; however, only a small number have scored proficiency in reading and writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher reviews the findings with the Assistant Principal in September, and periodically throughout the school year to determine if any adjustments need to made to scheduling or the ENL program. These are also reviewed at bi-monthly Academic Intervention Team meetings. 0  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction at P.S. 51 is delivered using both stand-alone and integrated ENL models, focusing on guiding reading, guiding writing, vocabulary building activities, and scaffolded approaches to content area subjects. For our integrated ENL model, students are grouped homogeneously and grouped within a two-year grade band. Integrated ENL is informed by the ENL teacher in consultation with the classroom teachers with TESOL certification. The Freestanding ENL program is content-based using the Common Core Standards, NYS Science and Social Studies Scope and Sequence, and classroom curricula as a road map for curriculum design. The integrated model involves strategic planning by the ENL teacher and classroom teachers to ensure the needs of ELLs are met. The ENL teacher plans with the classroom teacher to modify upcoming lessons, and parallel teaches, re-teaches the mini-lesson, provides small group support in the classroom and creates supports to supplement the lessons. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL coordinator ensures that all mandated time is being met when schedules are made each semester. The classroom teacher holding TESOL certification designates the periods of ELL instruction in their classroom. The schedule indicates the periods that students are being serviced in a week that includes 360 minutes of instruction for Entering and Emerging ELLs, 180 minutes for transitioning and expanding students, and 90 minutes of instruction for Commanding. One unit of study is 180 minutes. Entering students receive 2 units of study per week, with 180 of those minutes in Stand-Alone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA. Emerging ELLs receive 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL or 90 minutes of both Integrated ENL and Stand-Alone ENL. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL. 2.a. The mandated number of units for ENL are covered by the ENL teacher and by a classroom teacher who is dually certified. Advanced ELLs receive 180 minutes of ELA in addition to 180 minutes of ENL as part of the CR Part 154-2. The teachers create a schedule to ensure each student is delivered the required instructional ENL minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program has two models: integrated and stand alone. During integrated periods, ELL students are learning the content and skills being taught in their mainstream classroom and the ENL teacher is co-teaching with the classroom teacher or providing small group instruction based on the classroom curriculum. In the mainstream classroom, students are using the Expeditionary Learning curriculum; in science they are using the FOSS kits; in social studies, they using textbooks; in math, they 1  are using the TERC curriculum. The ESL teacher pushes-in during any of these subject areas and supports the ELL students in their classroom. The ESL teacher supports classroom lessons by using scaffolding such as modeling, bridging connections between new concepts and prior knowledge, contextualizing by using realia or graphic representations and schema building by previewing texts or using organizers to prepare for reading a text. Differentiation includes use of graphic organizers, leveled texts, teacher made templates for writing units, personal word walls for students, and vocabulary development in order to make content comprehensible to all ELLs. The ENL teacher provides support to classroom teachers by making themselves available during common preps and copies of the pacing calendar with teaching points are provided to the ENL teacher for planning. During the stand alone periods, all ELL students are learning thematically based units in the ENL program. Thematic units are aligned with the NYC scope and sequence and Common Core Learning standards. Content areas are embedded in the thematic units and taught simultaneously through the curriculum. Grade appropriate content is taught using these thematic units. Instruction in the ENL program is taught in English through the use of scaffolding strategies (modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, and text re-presentation). In addition to these strategies, collaborative learning activities are used, hands-on activities are planned, technology is infused into the curriculum and various materials are utilized, such as authentic texts, books on tape (The New Heights Program published by Pacific Learning), books in the students native language, and the Internet for support. The ENL classroom has a Smartboard and ELMO, which is used to deliver instruction in different modalities by using videos, visuals, audio, and interactive writing. The ENL classroom is risk-free, student-centered. ENL methodologies are used by the ENL teachers to make content comprehensible to all students and meet their needs. ELL approaches include, but are not limited to, the Language Experience Approach, where students share an experience and then produce language in response to their first-hand, multi-sensory experience, and the Whole Language Approach, where students develop their language skills in all four modalities; listening, speaking, reading, and writing. ENL instruction incorporates the components of Balanced Literacy, such as read alouds, shared readings, interactive writings, guided reading and independent reading & writing. Differentiation of process, product, and content is incorporated through the use of small group instruction, use of graphic organizers, and supplemental materials. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Upon entering our school, all English Language Learners are given the opportunity to produce work in their native language, as an assessment of their academic ability to analyze when possible by a staff member who is literate in that language. Students with a home language of Spanish are tested with the Spanish LAB-R. When students first enroll in the school they are provided with the opportunity to write in their native language so their teachers may assess their literacy skills and language proficiency. Throughout the year, students are able to access information in their native language through library resources (i.e.: bilingual dictionaries), multilingual books, Internet resources for translation, and peers who speak the same language. This work occurs in the ENL program as well as in the classroom. Classroom teachers use translated tests in math from the Eureka math program, and their entering and emerging ELLs also write ELA responses in their home language to demonstrate that the child has understood the content. Staff members at the school who speak the child's language, under the direction of the ENL teacher, are given tasks to evaluate ELLs in their home language. Teachers also observe ELLs interacting with a peer who speaks the same home language, as an informal assessment. As a very diverse school, we make every effort to honor and celebrate the languages and cultures of our students. Another means for our ELL students to access their native language occurs through our parent-run "Language and Culture Clubs" that will occur twice weekly beginning in January 2018. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. Currently, there are no SIFE students in our school, but in the event that we do get a SIFE student, our plan includes using small group instruction to address student needs, pairing them up with a buddy in their classroom who can help the student 2  transition, providing books in the native language, giving access to books on tape, creating an account in Imagine Learning, which is a computer based ENL program that address the four areas of language. SIFE are invited to participate in extended time and in Title III programs offered at the school. 6.b. For all newcomers, there will be hands-on activities and collaborative learning activities used to develop their Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills as part of the ENL curriculum. Chants, songs, and poems will be used to practice oral language. Newcomers will develop language through the content areas, which will be modified so that the information is accessible to the student. Newcomers will have access to bilingual glossaries and dictionaries in their native language. Parents will also be sent a copy of the bilingual glossaries to be used for homework. Newcomers will also preview exams in order to familiarize themselves with the format of the exam, and testing modifications will be provided. Test taking skills are infused into daily lessons, giving students practice in an authentic environment not through test-prep curriculums. Newcomers will also have student/teacher conferences more regularly in order to continuously assess their progress. 6.c.Developing ELLs will develop language through the content areas, which will be modified so that the information is accessible to the student. In addition to some of the supports the Newcomers are provided, Developing ELLs will receive scaffolded materials which include but are not limited to graphic organizers, sentence starters, prompts, visuals and texts revised to their reading levels. 6.d. We have found that Long Term ELLs are usually the students who stall in the same proficiency level for two years or more. These students are being closely monitored and will be the focus of an ELL study group. The ESL teachers will participate in a study group focusing on developing academic language in writing. This will be an eight week long cycle which may be continued, if found helpful. Teachers will research and learn about the development of academic language. The work will center around this population of ELLs and the goal will be to develop their academic language through exposure to various genres in reading and writing, multiple opportunities to practice and assess student progress throughout the year. 6.e As per the CR Part 154-2, students who are Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status receive 90 minutes of Integrated instruction with either a certified ESOL teacher and a K-6 certified elementary school teacher or a dually certified teacher in ESOL and Common Branch. Ells and Former ELLs who have exited ELL status within two years, receive time and a half for the ELA, Math and Science state exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies teachers use to provide access to content areas for ELL-SWD include pairing students for reading support, templates/prompts for writing activities, visuals, bilingual glossaries in content areas subjects, and the opportunity to use math and science texts in some native languages. The ENL teacher, reading specialists, SETSS teacher, and classroom teachers collaborate to create goals for students based on their IEPs. The Academic Intervention Team tracks students and their progress based on running records, progress reports, and reading levels. The ENL teacher pushing-in provides additional support during content area instruction in the classroom. The strategies teachers use to address the needs of these students include balanced literacy, small group instruction, guided reading, and content area based resources that are reading level appropriate for the students. Some of the materials used for subgroups are Wilson Just Words, Fundations, Handwriting Without Tears, in addition to multi-sensory approaches, small group instruction, and Reading Recovery. We use laptops, Imagine Learning, SmartBoard activities and tablets to include technology in our instruction. The native language material used is bilingual texts, bilingual glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, and Imagine Learning which provide supports in native languages initially. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses extended time to address some of the needs of ELLs in a small group setting. Teachers communicate with the ENL teachers and grade partners to ensure students are not missing materials covered while they may be pulled out for ENL instruction. Students are provided content area texts at their level, scaffolds, supports, prompts, templates and other forms of differentiation. Flexible programming is used to maximize time spent with non-disabled peers in ICT classrooms, extra-curricular programs and specials. 3  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school offers various intervention programs for ELLs: Intervention for ELLs in ELA - Our school offers a tier II intervention program to ELLs in the upper grades during extended time. The ENL teacher works with a small group of students to provide targeted intervention in literacy. Student work is periodically assessed and used to plan future instruction. The focus for this year has been to write argumentative and opinion pieces. Instruction focuses on academic language that can be used to express ones opinion in an educated manner. There will be an emphasis on the reading of information texts that will include argumentative and/or opinion pieces, which can be used as mentor texts. Teacher-made rubrics are used to assess students' final pieces. Other interventions: Our school also offers literacy intervention provided by the literacy coach during the school day. If one of our ELL students needs further support, they will be invited to participate. Our math coach also provides interventions in small groups during the day. ELLs who need further support in math will participate in this program. All intervention instruction is given in English. * Many of our ELLs also receive one-on-one support with student teachers or America Reads Tutors that are assigned to the classes. * Some of the ELLs also participate in a tutoring program at the school called Power Lunch, where the student is assigned a one-on-one tutor in reading that meets once a week during lunch. * Students receive targeted intervention for math by being placed in math groups for small group instruction based on their TERC and EngageNY assessments. The Math Coach pulls groups in need based on last year's NYS exam. Social Studies and Science intervention is implemented by the classroom teacher by pulling small groups based on teacher observations and pre/post assessments. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? All programs will remain in place due to their success from the following years. Additionally, we are trying to improve our programs by increasing co-teaching during push-in periods. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs in grades K-5 have equal access to school programs throughout the year. Kindergarten and first grade students have access to Reading Recovery, small group push-in instruction, an America Reads tutor, and Fundations (a word study program). Students in grades 2-5 have access to most of the programs listed above and in addition can receive support through the Title III program. ELLs have access to our guidance counselor when necessary. They are invited to participate in all after-school activities, as well as student council. ELLs are invited to participate in Title III programs through invitations and other extracurricular programs by receiving a flier and information in their native language. ELLs are represented in our programs through their participation. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We offer bilingual glossaries for content areas, as well as native language rich texts. There is an extensive library of books on tape called The New Heights Program published by Pacific Learning that is used with the ELLs. This program has leveled texts that students read with the audio assistance and then complete activities to further develop vocabulary, practice sequencing, literary responses, and even syntax of sentences and paragraphs. ELLs are also provided with leveled libraries so that students can read appropriate texts for their ability. All classrooms have Smartboards and computers, which are made accessible to the ELLs for further support. Our school also purchased an ENL computer-based program called Imagine Learning for the ELLs. This program is specifically designed to develop literacy skills for ELLs. The program is self navigating and operates on a 4  continuum based on the child's individual progress. Students further develop skills in all four modalities when using the program, by reading books, working on grammar, listening to songs and even recording themselves speaking. The program addresses a range of levels from beginners to advanced students in kindergarten though middle school grades. We also use a wide variety of graphic organizers and vocabulary lists for ELLs to support them in content based instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? While instruction is conducted in English, we are fortunate enough to be able to give support in Spanish since our ENL teachers, paraprofessionals and several classroom teachers are bilingual or proficient in Spanish and English to assist when necessary. For other native language support, we use parents and students to provide translations when possible, as well as the translation unit. Native language is also supported by providing texts in the students' native language and providing access to the internet for translations. ELLs also have access to bilingual glossaries, dictionaries, and a variety of books in their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ELL subgroups are created by grade and level as informed by our pedagogical staff. By ensuring frequent collaboration/conversation between our ENL teacher and teaching staff, the instructional strategies and curriculum is monitored to ensure it is age-and developmentally-appropriate. ENL instruction follows a model based on content area and covers lessons/topics at the pace of their mainstream classrooms covering grade level specific content and on students' reading levels. Teachers modify content area texts for ELLs, provide a variety of resources on a particular subject including videos, pictures and hands-on activities to support learning. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Since we are co-located with a District 75 school, we frequently coordinate meetings in order to address the needs of both school's students, including our ELL students. We share instructional resources on a case-by-case basis. Since many of our offices are located on the same floor, whenever a need from either school arises, we are able to communicate and make arrangements to work as a team for our students. The ENL teacher also collaborates with the speech teachers at the co-located school to share materials that are useful for both populations of students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students are given a tour of the school by our PTA , Principal, and Parent Coordinator. Beginning in 2018, we will offer several summer opportunities for all families to meet some school staff. This will occur via our PTA sponsored "Mentor" committee. In addition, we hold a get-together at a local park in the summer in which families are invited. This event is hosted by school staff and the PTA and allows new families (including our newly enrolled ELL students) to meet other staff, students, and parents. We also offer a parent orientation in the first month of school. We offer parent workshops throughout the year to educate parents about how they can become more involved in their child's English language learning process. We offer bilingual glossaries for content areas, as well as native language rich texts. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? None. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Not applicable. 5  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for personnel that work with ELLs at this school include OELL workshops, BETAC workshops, and PDs provided by PS 51 and other organizations advised by the OELL. Professional development is greatly supported and encouraged by administration. Teachers are able to share what they have learned from attending various PD workshops so other teachers may implement some of those strategies into their own lesson planning. The ENL teacher participates in an inter-visitation program where best practices are shared between ENL teachers from different schools. Common branch teachers receive ELL PD at PS 51 on Monday afternoons during Professional Learning Communities. Parent coordinators, secretaries and other staff are invited to attend these PDs. The Professional Learning Community and/or Professional Development dates for 2017/18 are: 9/11,9/18,9/25,10/16,10/23,10/30,11/20, 11/27, 12/4,12/18, 1/8,1/22, 1/29, 2/12,2/26,3/19,3/26,4/16,4/23,5/7,5/14, and 5/21. In addition, professional development has been arranged to support our math instruction in grades K-5. Staff developer, Toni Cameron will visit on four dates throughout the year with the specific intent of supporting teachers in writing effective math lessons that support all students, especially our ELL students. Literacy staff developer Hanna Schneewind will support our teachers throughout the year (6-10 days) in effective implementation of the workshop model in reading and writing. This work will assist teachers in creating multiple access points for our ELL students. Additional professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Standards by encouraging teachers to attend Bank Street workshops, Professional Development meetings through the Office of the ELLs and district ELL meetings, including the ELL Summer Institute. During Professional Learning Communities, teachers of ELLs and the ENL teacher are exploring ways they can support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. A focus study group will meet in the Spring to investigate ways to support ELLs as they engage in Common Core Learning Standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Support is provided to staff through suggestions/insights from the ENL teachers based on their knowledge of other programs or schools with optimal opportunities for ELLs. Teachers support students by providing middle school guidance, meetings with the parents, and facilitating the process of applying to schools. The professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 15% and 50% for all ENL teachers, are met by dedicating a Professional Learning Community to study group to topics surrounding ELLs. The first cycle will focus on adapting lessons for integrated ENL push-in models, management of new ELL students and creating/utilizing supports for ELL students. Parts of school professional development days are used as an opportunity for educators and staff to share teaching practices and insights. Records are maintained by having sign-in sheets to all PD's, which the ENL teacher collects and secures in the compliance binder. The ENL department also holds a study group that classroom teachers can participate in, which will focus on the instruction of academic language in the classroom. We will meet once a week, in the Spring semester, for a period, to discuss ways that classroom teachers can explicitly teach academic language in their daily lessons. These activities include analyzing student work, modifying literacy units to accommodate ELLs, and creating student rubrics and checklists. Teachers are also encouraged to attend workshops offered by the OELLs. Our literacy staff developers (Hanna Schneewind and Erin Gutfriend) will be on-site throughout the entire year working with teachers to support the implementation of various instructional programs designed to support English language learners. These dates are to be determined based on feedback from the 6 September to October sessions: October 10th and 11th; November 21st and 22nd; October 13 and November 3rd. Additionally, the ENL teacher is attending the ELL Leads Workshops on October 19th, November 28th, January 17th, and March 8th. This series of professional development will explore instructional approaches in advanced literacy that can help ELLs meet the demands of high level academic performance tasks, from oral discussion, and reading comprehension to academic writing. This series of workshops will contribute to the 50% ELL-specific professional development for ENL teachers 6  as per CR Part 154.2. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher, Lauren Sboto and/or other certified ENL teachers in the school, Leah Fernandes and Liz Pearson meet with parents of ELLs annually at individual meetings to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. These meetings take place during the time allotted for Parental Engagement on Tuesday afternoons, and parents will be invited via phone call. Translation and Interpretation needs are met as needed with the help of parents and staff who speak the native language of the ELL parent or by calling the DOE translation and interpretation line for over-the-phone interpretation services. At times, our parents and/or staff members will support the native speakers by either acting as a translator or by translating written material. Those parents who cannot attend an in-person meeting will be offered a phone conference with the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher will keep written records of when meetings or phone calls were held and that which was discussed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are very active at PS 51. ELL Parents attend PTA meetings, Family Fun Night, and attend many celebrations and publishing parties. ELL Parents attend the Title III Program beginning in January and ending in June. This program helps parents learn ENL strategies that they can use at home with their child/children. On October 25, we held a multi-cultural potluck/activity night for all families. This event supported our ELL parents/families by connecting them to the school community and by celebrating their language and culture. In addition, the PTA has organized a Language Club that will involve our non-English speaking parents (Dates to be determined). On a monthly basis, our Parent Coordinator organizes meetings with families to support their engagement in the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: Arts partnerships 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ryan Bourke, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Elias Howe School School DBN: 02m051 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ryan Bourke Title Principal Dana Goldberg Assistant Principal Giselle Leon Parent Coordinator Lauren Sboto ENL/Bilingual Teacher Martina Hornakova Parent Lauren Murynec Teacher/Subject Area Ayellet Moas Teacher/Subject Area Angela Beckham Dana Goldberg Coach Coach Denise Capasso School Counselor Bonnie LaBoy Vera Tang Allison Levine Emily Tomack Leah Fernandes Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Services Administrator Other Related-Service Provider, SETTs Other Teacher/Subject Area Other Teacher/Subject Area Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 10/30/2017 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02m051 School Name: The Elias Howe School Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lauren Sboto ENL Teacher No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school's written translation and oral interpretation needs are assessed based on the information parents include on their home language survey and in the interview process at the time their child is registered. The ENL coordinator conducts the interview with the parent and determines if an interpreter will be needed for communication with teachers and if materials sent home will need to be translated.The ENL teacher created a report that she regularly updates with the languages the parents speak by class and grade. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Chinese Bengali 554 77 38 29 72.8 10.12 4.99 3.81 545 83 32 29 71.62 10.91 4.2 3.81 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Newsletters, letters from the school leadership, publishing party announcements, calendars, and annual handbooks. These documents are disseminated the first of the month, every month and are submitted two weeks ahead time for translation. Parent teacher conference announcements November and March field trip permission slips Throughout the year after-school program information January Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We will ask bilingual staff members in the building to translate. We will ask bilingual staff members in the building to translate. We will ask bilingual staff members in the building to translate. We will ask bilingual staff members in the building to translate. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Family Fun Night Four Fridays throughout the school year interpretation service(s)? Interpretation will be provided by bilingual staff members and/or through the DOE translation and interpretation line. 1  Parent-teacher conferences November and March publishing parties Throughout the school year Parent Engagement activities such as our school Talent Show and awards ceremonies At the end of the school year Interpretation will be provided by bilingual staff members and/or through the DOE translation and interpretation line. Interpretation will be provided by bilingual staff members and/or through the DOE translation and interpretation line. Interpretation will be provided by bilingual staff members and/or through the DOE translation and interpretation line. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will check each student's blue card for emergency contacts and for their preferred language. Then, we will ask a bilingual staff member to make the phone call, or we will use the DOE translation and interpretation phone line to call the emergency contact person in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members will receive information on Chancellor's Regulation A-663 during a staff meeting. The DOE translation and interpretation phone line allows us to inform limited English proficient parents of ways that they can participate in their child/children's learning, by attending publishing parties, field trips, and other parent events throughout the year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 51 will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by ensuring all documents that require translation be submitted to the DOE translation service in a timely manner, as well as identifying interpreters for any potential students or parents who may require such services. New ELL parents also receive a brochure explaining their right to receive information in their home language at the time of the ELL parent orientation in the beginning of the year. 2  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will gather feedback from parents using Parent Surveys from the T&I Unit. 3 
