 01M110 School Name: P.S. 110 FLORENCE NIGHTINGALE Principal: KAREN FEUER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 110: The Florence Nightingale School 310100010110 Pre-K-5 285 Delancey Street, NYC, NY 10002 School Number (DBN): 01M110 212-674-2690 Phone Number: 212-473-5835 Fax: Karen Feuer KFeuer@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 1 Email Address: Karen Feuer Ellen Gentilviso Judy Sinsheimer TaishaSkulsky N/A N/A` N/A District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street, New York, New York 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: cchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 353-2948 Phone Number: 212) 353-2945 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue Ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Feuer Ellen Gentilviso Kathleen Keene Dana Nystrom Jennafer Bryson Alyssa Kraus *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jonathan Kowalski Taisha Skulsky Brock Withim Christina Kancso Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 110’s mission is to develop self-motivated, engaged, curious, creative individuals who can actively collaborate and demonstrate perseverance and flexible thinking as life-long learners.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We believe that academic rigor is foundational in every classroom to ensure that our mission is successful. We define academic rigor as high learning expectations for students to meet instructional outcomes and standards-based competencies. School leaders expect to see teachers meeting the learning needs of their students through thoughtfully planned lessons with embedded Universal Design for Learning [UDL] practices, effective teacher talk moves, small group instruction, and purposeful conferring. School leaders believe that we have raised the achievement level of many of our students by promoting high expectations for all students, regardless of placement, and by deepening our commitment to building a collaborative and positive professional learning community. Additionally, to ensure that we are consistently achieving fairness in education at PS 110, all students are exposed to a core body of content, activities, and learning experiences. This endeavor was undertaken over the last 10 years and represents a significant accomplishment. Furthermore, to enhance our school culture and to foster a supportive school environment that encourages quality of instruction across classrooms, we have targeted our development in the areas indicated below. 1. Social and Emotional Learning. PS 110 has launched various approaches to ensuring that the school is safe and secure, and that we maintain an orderly and supportive environment in which teaching and learning take place each day. Approaches include: a. Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS).The foundation of the approach emphasizes teaching students the behaviors we expect to see, reminding them to use those behaviors, acknowledging them when they do, and correcting them when they do not. b. Respect For All (RFA) Initiative and Student Team. Students from each class in grades 3 - 5 assist in addressing discrimination, harassment, intimidation and bullying (just to name a few topics) through a variety of of different experiences under the guidance of School Counselor, Suzanne Ross. c. Responsive Classroom. The Responsive Classroom is a widely used, research and evidence-based approach to elementary education that increases academic achievement, improves social skills, and leads to more high-quality instruction. PS 110 has incorporated 3 Responsive Classroom elements in every classroom: use of the chime, morning meeting, and closing circle. d. Second Step (in K-3 classrooms) The program is designed to teach children how to understand and manage their emotions, control their reactions, be aware of others’ feelings, and develop the skills to problem-solve and make responsible decisions. Each grade-level kit includes weekly lessons, engaging songs, games and videos, daily activities, and take-home materials to reinforce learning. e. Restorative Practices. Restorative Practice is a framework for building community and for responding to challenging behavior through authentic dialogue, coming to understanding, and making things right. 2. Special Education Reforms. In an effort to respond to special education reforms, which include providing increased access to and participation in the general education curriculum and empowering our school to have greater scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of students with disabilities, the School Implementation Team meets with each Special Education teacher and, where applicable, General Education Teacher to review student work, plan for instructional and environmental modifications and shifts, and elicit (based on progress monitoring) recommendations for student placements . This practice and review enables PS 110 to program students in flexible ways to meet their mandated needs. 0  3. Additional Arts and Enrichment Programs. We believe that all students exhibit talents and strengths. Our goal is to tap into and nurture these strengths in order to help build self-esteem. A greater sense of self will positively impact the willingness and desire to learn. We have expanded our arts and enrichment partnerships in order to provide the widest possible range of programs to excite and benefit our students. They include: a. Music with Third Street Music Settlement b. Paul Taylor Dance c. Chess d. National Dance Institute [NDI] e. Book Talk f. NY Historical Society: The Art of History g. Theater for a New Audience h. Take Two Film i. Recess Enhancement Program (REP) The 2016-17 Quality Review highlights our area of celebration: (4.2) engaging in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach (defined by the expectations of teacher teams in 4.2b and across the QR rubric) in addition to proficient ratings in domains 1.4, 3.4, 1.3, 3.1, 4.1 and 5.2. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Based on the 2018 state exams, the sub-group of SWDs performed far below the school wide average in both ELA and math proficiency levels. In ELA, SWD's had a 27% proficiency level compared to the 74% average proficiency level of the whole school. In math, the average student proficiency level of SWD's was 32% compared to the average whole school proficiency level of 77%. These students need increased access to rigorous instruction with scaffolding that bridges their current ability and the standards we want them to meet. Furthermore, teaching strategies must provide multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and able to demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in work products. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the Framework for Great Schools, PS 110 made the most progress in the element of the Supportive Environment, moving from a score of 4.32 to 4.35. Additionally, the 2017 Performance Dashboard, in the area of school practices and conditions (as measured by the Quality Review and NYC School Survey) that drive student achievement, shows that PS 110 is meeting rubric scores for Framework Elements: Collaborative Teachers (3.32), Strong Family-Community Ties (3.29) and Effective School Leadership (3.19). However we are only approaching rubric scores in Trust (2.77) and Rigorous Instruction (2.40). 1  For 2018, ELA (74% of students at Level 3 or 4) and math (77% of students at Level 3 or 4) proficiency scores ranked in the top 25% of the City. We are considered a High Impact/High Performance School. Trends for each year since 2014 in both ELA and math have shown improvement with the greatest improvement arc from 2016 to 2017. The Quality Review also highlighted three keys areas of focus: 1.2 Pedagogy Findings indicated that across classrooms, pedagogy and curricula were inconsistently aligned with core beliefs about how students learn best, which is informed by the Danielson Framework for Teaching, and is reflected in PS 110's mission statement. As a result (impact), teaching strategies across most classrooms unevenly provided scaffolds and high levels of questioning, leading to inconsistent engagement in tasks and in the demonstration of higher order thinking skills in student work products, especially for students with disabilities. 1.1 Curriculum Findings indicated that curricula and academic tasks reflected planning, although they inconsistently emphasized rigorous habits and higher-order thinking skills across grades and subjects. As a result (impact), a variety of learners, especially students with disabilities, had limited opportunities to meet Common Core learning Standards and to develop rigorous habits of mind. 2.2 Assessment Findings indicated that across classrooms, teachers used or created assessments, rubrics, and grading policies that were loosely aligned with the school's curricula. However, teacher's assessment practices inconsistently reflected use of on-going checks for understanding and student self-assessment. As a result (impact), feedback to students and teachers regarding student achievement was limited and teachers inconsistently made effective adjustments to meet students' learning needs. The development of the 2018-2019 CEP takes all of this data into consideration. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M110 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 379 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 22 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 62.0% % Attendance Rate 57.3% % Reduced Lunch 3.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 44.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 26.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.25 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 74.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 23 23 94.2% 4.7% 12.4% 9.8% 16.9% 2.9% 2 19% 4.8 77.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to ensure that teachers are better prepared to internalize the instructional shifts in pedagogy necessary to achieve the level of rigor required by the Common Core standards, they must be able to identify the critical content in curriculum and design structures for students to interact with the content in meaningful ways. Teachers must use questioning techniques that encourage students to think and make their thinking visible as well as be able to diagnose learning and engage students in cognitively complex tasks. Adult Learning Theory supports the effectiveness of teaming as a structure in which adults learn best, therefore the action plan below includes multiple opportunities for teams of teachers to learn together. Accordingly, administrative observations will focus on the related areas of the Danielson Framework for Teaching that include: Domain 1 -Planning and Preparation (Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and pedagogy (1a), Designing Coherent Instruction (1e)), Domain 3 - Instruction (Engaging Students in Learning (3c)) and "strengthening teaching and learning through Principles for Learner Agency."(District 1, Priority B) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percent of teachers demonstrating effective Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) as measured by the Advance observation tool will increase 5 - 10% from effective [73% - 10%] to highly effective [27% + 10%) and Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) as measured by teacher MOSL selections will also increase 5 - 10% from effective [68%-10%] to highly effective [9% + 10%]. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). K – 5 Teachers will review literacy units of study in reading to facilitate more targeted instruction and revise performance tasks, rubrics, and student checklists based on student work. K - 5 teachers will use the Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix to assess the rigor of academic tasks as well as Webb’s Depth of Knowledge to pre-plan higher order questions in lessons. Teachers will review K- 2 and 3 -5 progressions to reinforce focus on key standards and ensure rigor. Teachers will be offered professional learning opportunities both on and off-site that include: Wilson/Fundations, Internal DOE workshops targeting intervention strategies, Consultant Support from Lit Life (for grades K - 2, 10 days @ $1950 a day), and on-line learning activities. Teachers will participate in intra- and inter-visitations with a grade partner or other teacher. The focus of the visits will be on rigor in instruction, culturally responsive classrooms and teaching, and include general education classrooms as well as ICT classrooms. Teachers will receive training/support in Guided Reading to encourage daily activity in small groups with targeted instruction. A Universal Literacy Coach will be assigned to monitor students performing below grade level in K - 2 classes. She will work with teachers of those cohorts of students with a focus on guided reading (following the Jan Richardson text) and literacy centers to improve instructional practices. Students will be assessed frequently and instruction informed by those assessments. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K - 5 Year-long Teacher Teams K - 5 Year-long Teacher Teams K - 5 Year-long Teachers K - 5 Year-long ICT Teachers and Classroom Teachers K - 5 K - 2 November- June Teachers January - June 2019 Various K - 2 Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 5  A calendar of family engagement opportunities linking engagement to learning will be designed from November 2018 - May 2019 in collaboration with the SLT that will include workshops, math and literacy mornings, PBIS education, guest speakers, and Koffee with Karen sessions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · Additional resources (i.e., text sets as recommended by ELA Curriculum, leveled books for classroom libraries, and/or math materials) · Consultant fee (Lit Life) · Per diem for classroom coverage to provide additional time to collaborate, conduct inter/intra visitations during the school day · Per session for after school collaborations and Instructional Lead meetings The weekly block of 80 minutes for professional development will make it easier for staff to collaborate and implement elements of the action plan. Tax levy per diem funding will be set aside at the rate of 4 days a year for each teacher to attend professional development off-site. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded X In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. 25% of students approaching or not meeting standards on the fall F & P benchmark assessment will demonstrate progress by February 2019. 2. Of the 50% of observations completed by February 2019, 10 % of teachers will show improvement/growth in Danielson indicators: 1a, 1e and 3c. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) F & P Benchmark Assessments Advance teacher observation tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2016-2017 Quality Review, “school leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff.” This is especially true of expectations that promote a shared belief “that social emotional learning directly correlates with academic growth” and, as a result, the school has engendered “the creation of an environment with various structures and supports in place to develop a students’ social-emotional literacy” and it is a “priority and expectation across all content areas and grades during instruction and in the implementation of procedures throughout the building….” Additionally, the School Quality Guide – that includes feedback on both the Framework for Great Schools scores and the School Survey Scores- indicates that PS 110 continues to exceed expectations in ensuring a supportive school environment. However, only 76% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school have access to school based supports to assist in behavioral/emotional escalations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will increase skills in responding to behavioral and emotional outbursts and effectively de-escalate challenging behaviors. 85% of teachers will report access to school based supports to assist their response to challenging behaviors an as a result, student referrals will show a 5% reduction. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Continue implementation of Positive Behavior Intervention Support (PBIS) school wide in September, which includes defining, teaching, reinforcing, and monitoring positive behaviors of students as well as adults. In December of 2018, the PBIS Leadership Team will identify students (10% of the student body) for specific Tier 2 positive behavior intervention supports and develop an RTI plan for those students (i.e., Check-in, Check-out, Second Step in Third Grade etc.) In order to enhance the PBIS Program through student leadership and improve behavior in the cafeteria and schoolyard, the PBIS Team will develop and lead a Student PBIS Team in which students identified as “Hall of Famers” model school-wide expectations during lunch and recess. Three distinct student driven Respect for All Teams will meet monthly to actively promote a community of inclusion. PBIS will expand to include parents and students as decision makers. Through consistent family outreach structures, including surveys, newsletters, and meetings, there will be greater representation in the PBIS structure and better communication with all constituencies within the PS 110 community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K - 5 On-going All Staff K - 5 November 2018 PBIS Leadership Team and all staff K - 5 December 2018 PBIS Leadership Team and students 3-5 K-5 School Counselor December 2018 - May 2019 November 2018 School Leader and PBIS Team How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. A calendar of family engagement opportunities linking engagement to learning will be designed from November 2018 - May 2019 in collaboration with the SLT that will include workshops, math and literacy mornings, PBIS education, guest speakers and Koffee with Karen sessions. Additionally, families will be surveyed on the impact of PBIS twice a year (December and May) and a PBIS Newsletter will be disseminated three times a year (November, February and April). 8  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy funds will continue to be used to pay teachers per session for academic after school programs, off-site professional development fees and OTPS funds to support the purchase of additional instructional resources and materials. PBIS Team meetings are built into the weekly/monthly schedule to ensure consistent time for the team to meet. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. The Tiered Fidelity Inventory (TFI) will be completed two times a year in December and May. The TFI will be used by the PBIS Leadership Team to identify areas of success and areas for improvement based on an established rubric. 2. An internal teacher survey focusing on PBIS implementation and behavioral challenges will be conducted in February. 3. The PBIS team and relevant additional staff will develop clear benchmarks and instructional targets for SEL work in classrooms across the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The SWIS Suite will be used to collect, summarize and use student behavior data for decision-making and progress monitoring (and the overall reduction of The SWIS Suite will be used to collect, summarize and use student behavior data for decision-making and progress monitoring and tracking the overall reduction of referrals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers at PS 110 are committed to instructional improvement both in their classrooms and school wide. Additionally, school leadership recognizes the need for continuous professional growth and an on-going commitment to developing a school-based professional community that emphasizes trust and collaboration. According to the 2016-2017 Quality Review, indicator 4.2 was determined to be an area of celebration and concludes that the vast majority of teachers at PS 110 are engaged in inquiry-based, structured professional collaborations that have strengthened teacher instructional capacity. Additionally, teacher teams consistently analyze assessment data and student work, which sometimes results in improved teacher practice. There are distributed leadership structures in place for teachers to build their capacity and have voice in key decisions that affect student learning. The QR Rubric also indicates that teacher growth is supported by effective feedback using the Danielson Framework and that data informs professional development and teacher/administrator performance based decisions. However, the School Quality Guide, which consolidates percentile scores from the Framework Elements and Survey Element Scores, identifies that teachers want to know more about how (1) to incorporate students’ cultural and linguistic backgrounds into their practice (88% positive), (2) to work with teachers from other schools (57% positive), (3) to find time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas (87% positive), and (4) to try out new ideas (88% positive). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will develop and implement co-created curriculum in at least one math and literacy unit to provide for multiple entry points for all students that reflect culturally responsive content and pedagogy. Lessons and plans will reflect targeted strategies, materials, and tasks to differentiate and insure inclusion and access. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The mandated Professional Development Committee and the Equity Working Group will draft an intentional school-wide (on-site) PD plan incorporating cycles of learning aligned with the District's focus and based on disproportionality of achievement. Teachers December 2018 - June 2019 K - 5 Year-long Teacher Teams (both lateral and vertical) will deepen their review of curricula and understanding of student work and curricula progressions to: improve instructional practices, share effective teaching strategies already in use, support colleagues in using new instructional practices and adjust or change practices based on student outcomes. School Leaders will meet with Instructional Leads monthly to support collaboration among teachers, ensure school-wide coherency about how students learn best and usage of research-based instructional strategies to improve teacher practice and assess professional learning. Professional Development Committee and Equity Working Group Instructional Lead Teachers and Grade Teams K - 5 Year-long Instructional Leads, School Leaders The School Implementation Team will meet on a monthly basis to establish a consistent vision for ICT practice, including models of teaching and integration of UDL practices into classroom structures. Inter- and intra-visitations will be scheduled to support professional learning and ICT program growth. K - 5 All Teachers December 2018 - April 2019 The Diversity Team will design a cycle of learning focused on data, disproportionality in achievement, implicit bias, and interventions to improve access and scaffold improved student achievement by all students and specifically, students with disabilities (SWD). K - 5 October - January All Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A calendar of family engagement opportunities linking engagement to learning will be designed from November 2018 - May 2019 in collaboration with the SLT that will include workshops, math and literacy mornings, PBIS, guest speakers and Koffee with Karen sessions. 1  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Designate per session/per diem funds for PD Committee Meetings and/or vertical and grade team meetings. Designate per session funding to meet after school with Instructional Leads. Designate professional development funds for off-site PD. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Tracking teacher growth through observations along with an increase in effective ratings in Domain 3 - Instruction from the fall observation through February data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance teacher observation tool Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The SLT underscores the need for principals to lead change, nurture the leadership of others and provide guidance over time to sustain a coherent instructional program. Additionally, school leadership is committed to improving students’ ability to make progress and to promote access and equity for students in every classroom. According to the School Quality Guide for 2017-2018, which includes Framework Element Scores and Survey Element Scores, School Leadership scores increased from 3.19 to 3.21 and 3.47 to 3.52 respectively. Areas for growth include the principal setting clearer expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development (78% positive) and ensuring that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across grade levels at PS 110 (77% positive). Furthermore, only 82% (up from 77% the prior year) of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over developing and selecting instructional materials used in classrooms. Finally, parent responses to the survey indicated a 89% ( down 3% points from the prior year) positive response to encouraging inclusive leadership by School Leadership. School Leaders are committed to further developing teacher influence and deepening trust by encouraging continued feedback through regular meetings. Collaborating on school policy with respect to instructional materials, programs and practices as well as renewing a commitment to shared decision-making with families will support these shifts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June 2019, school leaders will promote cultural responsiveness in the classroom and dismantle practices that promote inequity when accessing the curriculum and as a result, 95% of students will be reading at grade level based on F & P results. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? K - 5 Year-long K-5 Year-long School Leader and Equity Working Group School Leader, Instructional Leads, Special Education Teachers and the PBIS Team. K-5 Year-long School Leader K-5 Year-long School Leader, Lead Teacher, Coach, Instructional Leads, All staff School Leader and Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Leaders will provide vision and direction for the school focused on issues of equity, access and opportunity for students of color given the disparities in student achievement data and the disproportionality of the the data between our white and Asian students and our black and brown students. School Leaders will continue to meet regularly with Instructional Leads, Special Education teachers, and the PBIS Team to engage in structured professional collaborations that promote shared leadership and improve student learning as well as program coherence. School leaders will meet with the Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach to receive professional development related to the Framework for Teaching. Together, they will visit classrooms, assess and calibrate scores based on Danielson Rubric, and provide targeted “next steps” (Instructional leadership) in relevant domains. School leaders will attend grade team meetings and participate in professional learning activities (i.e., professional development) with teaching staff to support program coherence and provide instructional leadership. School Leaders will meet 3 times a year with staff to review student data and analyze student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels K-5 November, January and March Intra and inter- visitations will be scheduled to develop leadership opportunities among the teachers. Specific classrooms will be set up as temporary lab sites to showcase exemplary teaching practices. K-5 Year-long Teachers School Leaders will collaborate with Instructional Leads to create mechanisms to solicit staff feedback on instructional materials, and curricula in order to assess results for next steps and ensure teacher influence. K-5 December - June 2018 School Leader, Instructional Leads and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. A calendar of family engagement opportunities linking engagement to learning will be designed from November 2018 - May 2019 in collaboration with the SLT that will include workshops, math and literacy mornings, PBIS education, guest speakers and Koffee with Karen sessions. Furthermore, a regular newsletter will be disseminated to families in (November, January, March and May) clearly communicating expectations around school policies and how parents can get involved in shared decision-making to review and potentially set new policy or procedures. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. N/A Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A review of grade team meetings will provide anecdotal evidence supporting progress in meeting identified goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Surveys to families   Attendance sheets  Equity Action Plan  Monitoring and tracking data for SWDs  Pre, mid and post assessments re: Culturally Responsive Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School Leadership Team underscores the need to support school leadership in bringing resources from the community into the school, welcoming, encouraging, developing and delivering partnerships with families, businesses and community-based organizations. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide that includes both Framework Element Scores and Survey Element Scores, 92% of parents responded positively that the school had conducted outreach and 92% responded positively to opportunities for parent involvement in school. However, a deeper dive into specific questions indicated that only 85% of parents agreed or strongly agreed that they are invited into classrooms to observe instruction and 87% of parents were somewhat likely or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. Furthermore, only 88% agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicated with them about how they can help their child learn. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of parents will respond positively that they have: (1) been invited into classrooms, (2) received regular communcation, and (3) guidance on how they can support their child and (4) have attended school wide activities. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The School Leadership Team will disseminate two Parent Surveys on key issues that will help inform parent workshops, meetings and involvement in the school. Pre-K - 5 Families Year-long SLT School Leaders and the PTA will collaborate on a year-long, dynamic parent engagement calendar for 2018-19 that will be informed by surveys and teacher feedback and ensures that all constituencies contribute to concrete suggestions. Instructional Leads will continue to make parent engagement/involvement a focus area at each of its monthly meetings and identify strategies to improve parent participation during the 2018-19 school year. Pre-K - 5 Families Year-long School Leader and PTA Pre-K - 5 Families Year-long School Leader, Instructional Leads A 360 review of the role of the Parent Coordinator will be conducted and more opportunities for the position to demonstrate leadership and innovation will be provided. Parents will serve as active members of the PBIS committee, decision-makers through parent surveys, recipients of parent newsletters and participants in Tier 2 Intervention Meetings. Pre-K - 5 Families Pre-K-5 Families Year-long School Leadership Team Year-long School Leader and PTA President 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. An OTPS allocation of Tax Levy funds will be allocated for refreshments, materials, and resources to encourage parents to participate in all activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 8  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, attendance at meetings, conferences and other activities will have increased by 15% from the prior year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Tenet 6 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 1. All K/1 classes are using the intervention 2. 8-10 lowest readers in first grade based on Reading Recovery assessment data 3. Students selected by classroom teachers based on below benchmark F & P running records Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) 1. Fundations 1. Whole Class 2. One-to-one 2. Reading Recovery 3. Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1. 1 Period , 5 days a week 2. During the school day; 5 days a week for 18 weeks 4. Small group 3. During and after the school day 5. Small groups up to 8 students 4. During the school day 6. Tutoring by teachers, 1:15 ratio 5. During the school day 6. After school, 30 hours, 1 day a week for 22 weeks 3. Leveled Literacy Intervention , a research-based reading system designed to supplement daily instruction to bring students to grade level performance 0  4. All students, K-5 4. Guided reading groups 5. Students are mandated for services, others are at-risk (below grade level) 6. Students are selected based on NYSED memo to the field identifying AIS-eligible students in grades 3, 4, and 5 Teachers identify students in need based on the NYSED memo to the field identifying AIS-eligible students. Science teacher identifies at-risk fourthgrade students. Services are determined based on ELA data, particularly focused on non-fiction texts. Mathematics Science Social Studies 5. Pull out mandatedSETSS services that include at-risk students 6. After school Tutoring Program , October through April, in literacy and mathematics Guided math groups: (Grades 3-5) Small groups After school, 30 hours, 1 day a week for 22 weeks Small group, 6 week cycles After school, 30 hours, 1 day a week for 22 weeks Small group, 6 week cycles During the school day, 1 - 3 times a week Guided science groups for students in grade 4 with instruction in academic vocabulary and reading grade appropriate texts Social Studies intervention is done in conjunction with literacy support. We use non-fiction texts to support upper grade students in transitioning from learning to read to reading to learn. The 1  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Services are offered based on teacher recommendations to the PPT as well as historical data. strategy of "close reading" is practiced. Students work in small groups to develop social skills w/peers, learn anger management techniques; develop conflict resolution skills; and learn strategies for dealing with anxiety, stress and other emotions and triggers. During the school day in 6 week cycles Small groups and one-to-one services as needed provided by the school psychologist and social worker as well as school counselor 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. PS 110 provides services that include the distribution of clothing and school supplies. Additionally, we have provided transportation and grocery support. The Crisis Intervention Team also reviews needs for at-risk counseling, referrals for family support etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). As of November 27, 2018, PS 110 had 42 students in temporary housing. The breakdown of the 42 families is as follows: 4 Families are in Shelters 3  2 Families are in Other 1 Family has Permanent Housing Status 35 Families are Doubled Up 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. PS 110 provides services that include clothing and school supplies. Additionally, we have provided transportation and grocery support. The Crisis Intervention Team also reviews needs for at-risk counseling, referrals for family support etc. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 6  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 110, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [PS 110 Florence Nightingale] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 9  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [PS 110 Florence Nightingale] ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 0  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 1  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 3  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 01 School Name Florence Nightingale Borough Manhattan School Number 110 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Karen Feuer Coach Rachel Benoff ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Natalia Billings Teacher/Subject Area Diane Lene /AIS Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Soberman Related-Service Provider Hanh Dinh Superintendent Daniella Phillips Assistant Principal Coach Lauren Bakian School Counselor Suzanne Ross Parent Parent: Cheryl Chen Parent Coordinator Milagros Candelaria Field Support Center Staff Member Pedro De La Cruz Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 353 5 Total number of ELLs 20 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.67%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 110 is using an assessment system that includes Fountas & Pinnell (F & P) Benchmark Assessment System and NYC Performance Assessments and curricula assessments for ELA and Mathematics to provide a more effective way of monitoring all of our students’ progress, including our ELLs. Additionally, PS 110 is using the NYC Periodic Assessment for English Language Learners in grades 3 – 5. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All of these assessments will be used and triangulated for grades K-5 as a baseline in determining students' proficiency levels at the beginning of the year and tracking the students' academic progress throughout the year. In addition, teacher designed assessment tools enable teachers across the grades to develop appropriate, differentiated instruction for our students. The assessments used at PS 110 enable teachers (including ENL, SETSS and AIS teachers) to monitor student progress and adjust instruction to align with each student's on going needs. All classroom teachers, as well as the Lead Teacher, ENL, SETSS and 6  academic intervention teachers, collaborate on analyzing this data and providing differentiated instruction based on assessment results and the needs of each student. Teachers are expected to work on differentiating instruction and setting student goals that are shared with both students and parents. Teams of teachers meet periodically to review student data and assess students’ academic progress and establish new goals. The ENL teacher works with ELL students in both acquiring English proficiency as well as providing the necessary support across all content areas. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In the fall, the ENL teacher administers the NYSITELL to all potentially eligible ENL students. Data generated by the NYSITELL determines which students will receive ENL services and at which level. The data from the previous school year’s NYSESLAT also provides valuable information that supports placement of current ENL students. In addition, classroom teachers administer the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment to all students in Grade K-2. Periodic assessments in the form of Running Records and teacher designed assessments allow us to identify students’ strengths as well as areas of need in order to adjust and differentiate instruction for our ELLs throughout the school year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At PS 110, all data is reviewed by the Principal (3x a year), classroom teachers, the ENL teacher, AIS teacher and SETSS teacher. If the data shows that there are ENL students who are well below grade level expectations as readers, those students are referred to the AIS teacher for additional support. Over the course of the year, if a student does not advance in performance, the teachers can present those students in a PPT meeting. These regularly scheduled meetings are with a team that includes the Principal, SETSS teacher, ENL teacher, AIS teacher (if needed) as well as other Service Providers. Based on the teacher’s report, the PPT will determine what further interventions could support the child or if the student should be referred for other evaluations. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 110 uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RtI framework using the tiered system of instructional support. That system includes adding layers of support to the core classroom instruction and continuing to layer that core or pulling back those support layers as frequent formative assessment indicates to target instruction matching students’ learning needs. The process to ensure an effective match between learning needs and instruction in the classroom begins with a universal screening to establish a baseline of student performance and identifying students who are not making academic progress at the expected rates. For example, using the HLIS, teachers uncover the factors that have and may continue to influence the student’s English language learning process triangulated with other assessments (i.e. math inventories (ECAM), F & P Benchmark assessments) in both English and the home language to ensure a complete picture of skills, strengths and needs. Classroom instruction at PS 110 includes engaging and interesting content as well as instructional models that encourage, peer-to-peer and peer-to-teacher collaboration, accountable talk – using various structures to encourage students to talk to each other (turn and talk, think, pair and share, student led conversation circles). An inquiry approach to learning in classrooms also provides opportunities for students to explore a topic and grapple with content. Additionally, scaffolds for student learning (i.e., graphic organizers) to support those students that need more to meet rigorous instructional outcomes. If ELLs are not showing sufficient progress in their classrooms, then a plan for intensive and targeted intervention is developed by the classroom teacher, ENL teacher, AIS teacher and Principal. The plan is time bound, with baseline and benchmark assessments included for progress monitoring and includes an explanation of differentiated instruction; skills to target that address both home and second language concerns, and the amount of instruction in either home and/or the second language. If progress is not documented, the plan intensifies in targeted intervention (i.e., counseling, at-risk speech services) as well as becoming more culturally and linguistically responsive (i.e., Tier2 and Tier 3). Progress monitoring requires the use of formative data that is key to making educational decisions about further changes in goals, instruction and/or services. 7  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Outcome assessments, which include the NYSESLAT, ELA and MATH scores, final F & P Benchmark results and end-of-year math inventories are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. Additionally, the filtering capabilities of the EDAT, will allow the ENL teacher and classroom teacher to data delve for ELL-specific trends and patterns in designing effective instruction and/or intervention for students.. A review of school demographics, which includes a comparison of ELL and non-ELL data, also alerts us to students who exhibit known risk factors, in Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking. This tool allows us to tailor more timely and targeted interventions for at-risk students in our ELL population before reaching a more critical level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The above on-going meetings are used to share assessment and instructional information between all teachers who may provide services to individual students in the ENL program. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs are organized by grade and proficiency levels. Our ENL program goal is to support the integration of ELL students into mainstream classrooms; therefore instruction is delivered using standalone and integrated ENL programs. For example, the ENL teacher pushes into third, fourth and fifth grade classes with English Language Learners and supports the teachers in their classrooms. The push-in periods encompass both literacy and math instructional blocks during 4/45 minutes periods a week. In addition, we use a standalone model with students to provide one-on-one support so crucial to Entering and Emerging second language learners. Furthermore, during standalone periods, ELLs are clustered by proficiency level spanning grades K-5. While there are no bridged general education classes at PS 110, standalone ENL periods can span two contiguous grades. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Both our organizational models (push-in and pull-out) and program models (standalone and integrated) are in place to ensure that the mandated number of ENL instructional minutes are provided by the fully qualified ENL teacher to each of our English Language Learners based on proficiency levels. Beginner/Entering and Low Intermediate/Emerging ELL students receive at least 360 minutes each week, Intermediate/Transitioning and Advanced/Expanding ELL students receive at least 180 minutes each week. Students at the Proficient/Commanding levels receive 90 minutes of instruction. In addition, standalone ENL instruction is in English but if needed, it is supported by the student's home language. A student's home language is supported by the use of bilingual dictionaries and classroom library books in both English and 8  home languages as well as by students themselves in small group work with summaries, feedback and questions from students in English. This ensures that students gain content knowledge in the home language as well as an opportunity for the ENL teacher to assess home language academic comprehension and assess progress in English acquisition. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL instruction integrates both subject and language learning. We want ELLs to learn concepts and content knowledge while learning their second language. The ENL strategies are applied in teaching the four language modalities including listening, speaking, reading and writing. While targeting the areas of listening and speaking, the ENL teacher provides the opportunities and the environment for interactions between students as well as interactions between teacher and student. During activities that require problem solving, students explore the problem in partnerships or triads; then report back to the class. Students practice language skills by surveying their classmates, parents, and teachers on a variety of topics integrating mathematics skills as well. Currently, teachers are using technology (iPods, iPads, phone apps, computer programs, voice threads and technology assisted feedback) to improve writing skills in addition to scaffolding students' speaking and listening skills. In addition, in all classrooms, teachers are asking open-ended questions and using less teacher talk to encourage student participation in deeper and more meta-cognitive ways. Specifically, the K - 2 reading and writing curricula is integrated and designed to support students in developing oral language. While students are aware that they can get ideas from books, poems, songs and each other, they are now exposed to the notion that ideas for composing (orally and in writing) can come from the experiences that they have. The teacher consistently facilitates making connections to stories from different cultures. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking students are assessed using the Spanish LAB in addition to the NYSITELL. For non-Spanish speaking students, we evaluate through their native languages in content areas such as math, social studies, and science. In addition, over the course of the school year, children are evaluated using teacher made assessments and performance assessments, which have been translated. Additionally, Appropriate translation tools are used for uncommon languages, such as Portuguese. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE: If any SIFE students were to attend PS 110, the ENL teacher together with other trained pedagogues provide the necessary support to them, in the form of personalized instruction to compensate for gaps in foundational knowledge. The ENL teacher has purchased materials specifically designed for such students, for example, to teach basic literacy to older students. Newcomer: Instruction for ELL Newcomer students mainly focuses on basic content to develop literacy skills and on the development of interpersonal skills to improve listening and speaking. Second and third year Newcomer ELL students continue to develop literacy skills while also developing a deeper familiarity with test formats and test-taking skills. Developing: ELL students who are still transitioning after having received ENL services for a longer amount of time receive additional support. They are assessed by the ENL teacher to determine any specific issues which are preventing the student from performing at a high enough level to exit the program. Any specific issues are addressed by the ENL teacher who communicates with the classroom teacher and at-risk specialists to ensure consistency in any interventions. Our Pupil Personnel Team meets once each week to discuss students who may be in need of extra support. Recommendations are made for RtI prior to beginning a full-scale individual evaluation. 9  Long Term: Long term ELL students are frequently assessed and evaluated in the area/s of need. For such students the school develops and follows an intervention plan to support greater progress in language development. Former ELLs: Former ELLs receive 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL/ ELA for up to two years after exiting ELL status. Additionally, the ENL teacher maintains communication with classroom teachers of former ELL students to provide suggestions in the event of language related issues. The classroom teacher alongside the ENL teacher reviews earlier math and ELA scores to target areas where academic language support is still needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? PS 110 is ensuring that all ELL-SWDs are receiving all mandated services as required by CR Part 154 and their individual IEPs. Teachers of ELL-SWDs modify content to accommodate their students' individual needs as specified in their IEPs. Additionally, these teachers work closely with the ENL teacher (trained pedagogue) so that specific modifications accommodate language-learning goals as well as content-acquisition goals. All teachers (classroom, cluster and ENL) encourage ELL-SWDs to become conversant in content areas or on topics by building knowledge in their home language and making connections based on schema with appropriate leveled texts. Question webs are used in the ENL classroom to encourage connections. ELL-SWDs practice the technique of questioning with a peer buddy and their teacher to make meaning of their reading and give voice to what they don’t understand. Teaching ELL-SWDs must include explicit expectations for developing critical thinking, interpretation and drawing conclusions and a lot of practice to ensure skill development. Teaching students to question while reading helps them understand how to infer meaning from a text. Modeling and practice with texts greatly improves reading comprehension. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students spend time in language rich environments in which they observe, touch, listen, talk and interact with others. Early reading and writing instruction is informal and playful and based on oral language activities (poetry, storytelling, songs and rhymes), which lay the foundation for independent reading and writing. Our school provides a balanced literacy program that teaches skills within the context of meaningful interactions with leveled texts that elicit responses from students about ideas, characters and events in small group and/or whole discussions either through turn and talk or student-led conversation circles. The ENL teacher pushes into the classroom during ELA and other content area instructional times. While the classroom teacher is providing a mini-lesson, the ENL teacher is parallel teaching to a small group of students. During push-in periods, the ENL teacher will either work with ELL students in a small group or will circulate throughout the classroom depending on content and individual needs of the students. The ENL teacher also provides stand-alone instruction as well with either individual students or in small groups. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention for ELLs in ELA includes during the day, RtI after- school reading instruction to double or triple the rate (accelerate) of reading to practice and catch up to their non-ELL peers. High success reading requires building at-a-glance word recognition vocabulary and the best way to do that for all students is to experience lots of high-success reading and provide opportunity for students to discuss their reading. It is not possible for someone to learn from a book when they are unable to read accurately, fluently and with understanding. The ELA intervention is designed as a 30-minute expert tutorial or small group (two or three ELL/Non-ELL students) which represents a one-third increase in reading lessons and puts appropriately leveled books in the hands of students that they can read all day long. Initially, the focus is on reading strategies, slowing down and rereading, are two of the most common that good readers use when they encounter difficulty with a text and then move onto practicing comprehension strategies that include: monitoring for meaning, using and creating schema, asking questions, determining importance, inferring, and using sensory and emotional images. 0  Additionally, the “close reading” strategies in use in grade 3 – 5 classrooms also benefit ELL students as well as their non-ELL peers and are a core practice in the Expeditionary Learning curriculum that we use. Teachers work with small guided math groups in their classrooms and focus on re-teaching and reviewing concepts taught based on daily formative assessments (exit tickets) from each lesson in the Eureka math curriculum. Also, a teacher on each grade is assigned a group of low performing math students (some of whom are ELLs) to specifically teach into individual areas of weakness. PS 110 has an interdisciplinary approach to teaching and learning. The ENL teacher regularly pushes into classrooms during a humanities block of instruction when classes are engaged in a social studies unit that includes reading, writing, and mathematics connected to a specific unit of study. In addition to this, the ENL teacher also pushes into science. Using this interdisciplinary approach, ELLs are able to build content area vocabulary and knowledge along with improved language acquisition through a co-teaching model. All intervention services at PS 110 are conducted in English, however, interpreter assistance is provided by staff members in the building who speak Spanish, Mandarin, Russian in addition to English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We do not plan to add new programs or change any existing programs for the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English Language Learners have equal access to all programs in the PS 110 building. Some of those programs include the on-site, no-fee after-school program, as well as the fee-based art, chess and piano programs. The on-site, no-fee after school program is sponsored by Henry Street Settlement and is self-sustaining and separately financed. The program offers "homework help" and other recreational activities. There is also an on-site fee-based after school program (Super Healthy and Happy Kids) as well as fee-based after school programs that pick-up at PS 110 building such as the 14th Street Y and Beyond Martial Arts. There are also fee-based after school chess and language clubs. All programs are open to all PS 110 students and provide scholarships if needed. At the beginning of the school year, tables are set up for parents to obtain information on after school programs and flyers are sent home in student backpacks. The Parent Coordinator is readily available to answer questions from ELL parents about programs and to seek translation/interpretation assistance if needed. After school groups are small, so that participation by ELLs in programs ensures individual attention and support from counselors and instructors. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ENL and classroom teachers use laptops and Google Translate to ensure students' comprehension of the content under discussion and for homework assignments. Written translations of material are printed out for students to study from. Students are also encouraged to use bilingual dictionaries to bridge transitional needs on all assignments. All ELLs use instructional software in the computer lab and the classroom daily and includes applications such as Raz-Kids., Math Blaster, Reader Rabbit, and more. All classrooms have media carts that include elmos and laptops and access to media programming that ensures multi-sensory learning opportunities with access to Brain-Pop, united streaming.org and Discovery and National Geographic websites. PS 110 uses the NYC core curriculum in social studies and science and has received instructional materials in specific content areas as well as purchasing additional content area specific print materials with NYSTL funding in students' native languages. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 1  Student's literacy skills are easily transferred from a first to a second language, therefore we encourage the use of an ELLs home language in our program to build a connection between home and school and enhance second language acquisition by making content comprehensible. Families are encouraged to read and talk to their children in the family's home language if it is strongest. It will give their children the richest possible language foundation and advance both student's native as well as English Language acquisition in academic and social situations enriching their understanding. Peers that speak the same language as an English Language Learner are encouraged to "buddy-up" to read and converse during formal (classroom/library) and informal (lunch/recess) opportunities. In addition, students may be given projects to do together with a parent or older sibling in the home language. This serves to communicate that maintenance of the home language and literacy skills are important and also involve family members in the substance of in-school work. Students with sufficient literacy skills use bilingual dictionaries. Oral interpretation, written translation and software in native languages and English is also used. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ENL instruction corresponds to the ages and grade levels of the students. ELL students are grouped according to grade and proficiency level, Entering and Emerging students together. All resources are chosen based on individual needs. Additionally, the ENL teacher meets with the classroom teacher of each ELL student and receives a curriculum map in core content areas of mathematics and literacy as well as a list of resources (i.e., mentor texts, rubrics, and student work) attached to the curriculum. Furthermore, all pedagogues are developing a deeper understanding of the Common Core Standards and how to appropriately support ELLs. The ENL teacher is trained in ENL pedagogy from K-12. The ENL teacher receives professional development on a regular basis to ensure that her content knowledge and pedagogical knowledge is current. In addition to a variety of proficiency levels, one of the most challenging aspects of delivering instruction from K-5 is addressing the wide range of developmental needs of all students. It is therefore necessary for the ENL teacher to conduct informal assessments on a continuous basis. In that way, the ENL teacher is able to work, together with the classroom teacher to provide the necessary instruction to develop the necessary skills for all ages and proficiency levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Most newly enrolled ELLs are predominately Kindergartners. They are assigned a peer-buddy in the same class and if possible, a buddy who speaks the ELL's home language. Peer-buddy responsibilities include introducing the newly enrolled ELL student to the routines and rituals of the classroom, key areas of the school, and the expectations to knowledgeably manage using the restrooms, eating and socializing at lunch, playing safely during recess, and enjoying specialty classes for at least a month. This same protocol is used for ELLs who enroll during the course of the year to ensure that they become familiar with the school, protocols, staff and to generally help them acclimate to their new surroundings. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Every teacher, including the ENL teacher at PS 110 is involved in Professional Development activities mandated during once a week meetings on Monday afternoons from 2:40 – 4:00 pm. Additionally, grade teams meet at least once a week and continue to refine the common core aligned curriculum and look at student work to better inform teaching and goal-setting for students. The professional learning committee, which includes the ENL teacher, is involved in the planning of all professional development to ensure that teachers meet language learners’ linguistic and academic needs. At weekly grade level conferences, the ENL teacher supports classroom teachers focusing on the learning needs of ELL students. The ENL teacher assists classroom teachers in developing strategies that will benefit ELL students and reinforce classroom teaching connected to the curriculum maps on every grade. Data meetings with teachers held formerly three times a year (October, January, April) with the principal provide a dedicated opportunity to disaggregate the data of the schools lowest 1/3 as well as ELLs and ensure that teachers are scaffolded in their work to make progress with both subgroups. The certified ENL teacher attends citywide conferences and turn-keys linguistic and cultural information to facilitate learning and to build cross-cultural understandings at both all-staff and grade team meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At PS 110, all non-ELL certified teachers receive the required 15% of the total number of professional development hours as prescribed by CR Part 154.2 that are dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Special education teachers and special education paraprofessionals receive 10 or more hours of training in specific teaching strategies to use when working with English Language Learners through a consultant model of professional development. Files of attendance and agendas for these various meetings are maintained by the principal and the assistant principal. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At PS 110, the ENL teacher uses the 40 minute block of parent engagement time each Tuesday to arrange individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development in all content areas. Additionally, the classroom teacher is invited to attend and share updates on the student’s progress. Interpretation is available on site in Spanish, Mandarin, and Russian. If other languages are preferred, 3  the Translation and Interpretation unit is called. These individual meetings preview parents/guardians of ELL students before the mandated parent-teacher conferences and ensure that families are aware and have an opportunity to support their child. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs attend publishing parties celebrating end of unit student work and provide valuable translation services for one another at parent-teacher conferences (November and March each year), PTA meetings, and informal school gatherings. The Parent Coordinator, a familiar and approachable figure, creates a welcoming school environment for parents, attending ELL parent meetings to get to know parents better. She identifies parent concerns at the school and serves as a liaison in communicating those concerns to school personnel. She conducts outreach to make sure that ELL parents are notified in a timely manner of all citywide ELL parent events and attends as well as accompanies groups of parents to those events. She is also in contact with the NYC Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation of written communication as well as interpretation for oral communication. She has a network of parents she can access in our generous school community to donate time to translate and interpret for children as well as their parents. With guidance and supervision from the principal, the Parent Coordinator partners with the PTA, the School Leadership Team, community groups and parent advisory councils. She is critical to the integration of our ELL parents into the school community. Each year the Parent Coordinator facilitates a workshop specifically for ELL parents to provide an overview of opportunity and resources to families of ELLs. The use of NYC Accounts - viewing student profiles and accessing the same data that school staff and administration use in making instructional decisions enable families of ELLs to monitor for improvement. ELL parents are also invited to family workshops to build their familiarity with Common Core aligned literacy and mathematics curricula led by teachers, the principal and the Peer Collaborative Teacher. The ENL teacher and the Parent Coordinator, fluent in Spanish, will host 3 family workshops in conjunction with staff on how families of ELL students can support their children’s academic success at home based on the results of various assessments. We will also continue to have family workshops on topics such as cooperation, discipline and responsibility, understanding and redirecting misbehavior, building character and self-esteem and raising a family in today's world. Translation and interpretation will be provided at all workshops and ELL families will be individually invited through one-to-one communication. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. There is no additional information relevant to this LAP at this time. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Karen Feuer, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Karen Feuer Title Principal N/A Assistant Principal Milagros Candelaria Parent Coordinator Natalia Billings ENL/Bilingual Teacher Cheryl Chen Diana Lene Parent Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Soberman Teacher/Subject Area Rachel Benoff Lauren Bakian Coach Coach Suzanne Ross School Counselor Daniella Phillips Pedro De La Cruz Hanh Dinh N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider: Speech and Language Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6/19/17 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 01M110 School Name: Florence Nightingale Superintendent: Phillips The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Milagros Candelaria Parent Coordinator No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. (1) The ESL teacher, in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator, reviews all Home Language Information Surveys (HLIS) and compiles a list of families whose first language is not English. (2) The Parent Coordinator and Principal survey these families using interpreters to assess the need for written translation and oral interpretation needs. (3) The list is developed and (4) prior to each Parent Teacher Conference date, the list is updated for accuracy. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral This year, PS 110 had 20 families requiring translation and/or interpretation in the following languages: In all listed languages, including English. 1. 10 in various Chinese dialects Languages #1-6 represent a total of approximately 6% of our school community. The oral translations were requested in Chinese, Spanish and Bengali The languages requested for oral translations represent 5% of the school community. 2. 7 in Spanish 3. 2 in Bengali 4. 1 in Arabic 5. 1 in Polish 6. 1 in Portugese 7. English 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A (The ELL population is less than 10%.) Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely PS 110 distributes the following documents that require translation: (1) a summer packet of information to each student's family with information relevant to the start of the school year including after-school programming, (2)The Parent Handbook, which is distributed annually at the start of the school year, (3) a Family Letter from the principal six times a year, (4) three notices of parent teacher conferences, (5) annual notice of New York State testing dates, and (6) other activities such as PTA meetings or special family workshops. (1) June 28, 2017 (2) September 7, 2017 (3) September, October, December, provision of translated documents to parents. Several weeks before the document goes out to the families, we use the free translation service for NYC DOE documents. We fill out a translation request form and email it to translations@schools.nyc.gov. When applicable, we also use common translated 8  January, March, May (4) November, March, May documents explaining programs, services and policies and other sample school letters and forms on the DOE's website and intranet portal. (5) September and March (6) monthly: September, October, November, December, January, February, March, April, May, June 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school PS 110 will meet formally and face-to-face with parents: (1)Curriculum Night (2)Parent Teacher Conferences) (3)Additionally, teachers meet with parents during the 40 minute block of Family Engagement on Tuesdays on a case by case basis. (4)Furthermore, the School Implementation Team meets with parents of students with disabilities two times a year. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We use the over-the-phone interpretation services to request an over-the-phone interpreter. We also use staff members who are fluent in Spanish and various Chinese dialects. (1) September 13, 2017 (2) November 16, 2017; March 15, 2018; May 23, 2018 (as needed). (3) Every Tuesday, as needed (4) This is determined on an individual basis. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 9  In the event of a school emergency, we will either utilize our bilingual (Chinese, Spanish) staff members to reach limited English proficient families or the over-the-phone interpretation services described above. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school ensures that limited English speaking families are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education by establishing the following: 1. The principal designates a language access coordinator who requests and maintains related documents, certifies eligibility for translations/interpretations, and ensures the provision of appropriate services for limited English speaking parents. 2. The school has developed a language access plan which is aligned with the DOE Language Access Policy 3. The school translates important documents to share with limited English speaking families 4. The ESL teacher receives professional development related, in part, to the Chancellor's Regulations A-663. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Non-English speaking families are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to all activities and services at PS 110 because translation and interpretation services are provided to all parents who need language assistance.The PS 110 community has staff and parents who speak both English and a second language and are eager to assist. Translation has been provided for all required documents including registration and enrollment forms, special education and related services, transfers, Discipline Code, school-based progress reports, and any other documents that contain individual student-specific or school policy information. Additionally, oral interpretation services are available during all school meetings/activities. Budget allocations are scheduled to support both written and oral interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 0  This coming year, the SLT will disseminate two translated Parent Surveys on key issues (including quality and availability of translation and interpretaton services) that will help inform parent workshops, meetings and involvement in the school. 1 
