 06M153 School Name: P.S. 153 ADAM CLAYTON POWELL Principal: KAREN BAILEY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Elementary School 310600010153 Pre-K through 5 School Number (DBN): 06M153 1750 Amsterdam Avenue, New York, NY10031 212-927-8611 Phone Number: 212-234-4616 Fax: Karen Bailey Kbailey2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Karen Bailey Jason Hart AishaBruno Jason Hart Francisco Santiago N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 06 Manuel Ramirez Superintendent: 4360 Broadway, New York, NY 10033 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mramire4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-521-3757 Phone Number: 917-521-3797 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 Seventh Avenue, 8 th Floor, New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Bailey Jason Hart AishaBruno Jeanetta Stokes Jocelyn Mendez Courtney Donovan Annette Schaffer *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/CSA   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ericka Perez Kimberly Yang Rodriguez Alana Bacchus Matthew Laurel Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 153 is a diverse learning community located in a culturally diverse neighborhood in Harlem. As a neighborhood school serving approximately 600 students, we have a long standing presence and history in the community. We continually work to improve achievement in the academics as well as in the social and emotional areas. Our School Mission Statement: We are a diverse school community dedicated to achieving excellence in education. We will address the emotional and academic needs of our students by providing a nurturing environment that fosters   high expectations. Through various instructional programs and strategies such as balanced literacy, constructivist math, thematic units and learning through the arts, our students will become critical thinkers and lifelong learners. Our School Vision Statement: At Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Elementary School, our vision is to prepare all students to be lifelong learners who will be intrinsically motivated to achieve their goals. The students will be respectful, responsible and possess a positive self-image of themselves, their family and community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Although PS 153 is a large zoned school, we continue to create and foster the experience of a smaller, program-based school for our students. We offer a wide-range of programs that account for all of our students varied needs and interests from pre-kindergarten all the way through fifth grade. For over ten years, we have had three full day Pre-Kindergarten classes. We offer a Dual Language program, a Gifted and Talented Program, and Collaborative Team Teaching settings in addition to our general education program. Through these program options, we ensure that every learner is provided with an educational environment that caters to their strengths and needs while still being an essential of our larger school community. Within our busy vibrant neighborhood, PS 153 is a warm, calm oasis. From the moment one enters our welcoming blue gates, they are greeted by clean and bright corridors. Rigorous student work is displayed with pride throughout the building. P.S. 153 can be like entering a dance studio, stepping onto a basketball court, or sitting in a cozy bookstore. It is a place where you have space to be who you are and do what you love. Our school culture is one that continually creates experiences for children that tailor their learning to them. We engage students in activities that develop critical thinking skills, foster social and emotional growth, and prepare them to be lifelong leaders and learners. P. S. 153 is proud to have a robust arts program. All of our students are exposed to various arts instruction. In partnership with Harlem School of the Arts, students have more opportunity to discover and foster their artistic talents than ever before. They participate in string, dance, percussion and Art classes. Our resolute dedication to music education is a major source of pride at PS 153. Our bi-annual concerts give opportunities for students from all programs to come together and share their amazing talent with the rest of the community. Our students’ achievement in the arts is recognized and valued beyond the walls of our school. At PS 153, we are not only dedicated to preparing our students to be strong academic leaders but also leaders within and for their community. Even at elementary school age, we believe that it is our duty to foster strong character traits and a commitment to service. These values are infused into every aspect of school life. Through our Peace Builder’s program, PS 153 has been as a Respect for All School for two years. When one walks through our halls, they will see student projects centered around equity and social justice prominently displayed. From exhibitions about recycling and the environment at our kindergarten Science Fair to essays about women who have advocated and fought for equality, our commitment to exposing our students to the social challenges throughout history and those who have worked to overcome them is unwavering. Through the leadership of our Student Government, we have facilitated countless community- based service projects. In partnership with City Harvest we collected over 750 cans at our 2017 Annual canned food drive and our school community donated 600 pairs of pajamas at our 2017 Winter Pajama Drive. Older students have written letters of appreciation to troops serving overseas and with the aid of upperclassmen from Student Government our kindergarten, first, and second graders have created get-well cards for students at St. Jude’s Children’s Hospital. We are continuing to grow and develop our math and science programs with a focus on STEM Education. Every grade hosts a Science Fair where students, teachers, and families work together to create and display science projects reflecting their grade-level curriculum. Every student is required to research a problem and develop a scientific solution to that problem. Students do not only learn through developing their own projects but through 0  listening and exploring the exhibitions of their fellow students across all grade levels. We also began our pilot coding program with a number of first grade students and will be expanding that program. We have many partnerships with Community Based Organizations such as our nutrition program with the City College of New York and our Girls and Boys Mentoring Programs with CUNY schools. We are also proud fo our Wellness Initiatives this year in which we've opened a yoga studio and P.E. activity center. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 153’s multifaceted diversity is a major source of pride for our community and is celebrated continuously throughout the school year. As a staff, we are unambiguously aware, and we share this knowledge with our students that diversity extends beyond culture. Each one of our students has a unique story. With that story comes an array of individual strengths and areas of need. Through various programs and initiatives, we are dedicated to ensuring that every student finds their own tailored path to excellence. Our Dual Language program provides students with instruction of all core subjects in both Spanish and English. This rigorous program places students in an environment where they are fully immersed in the academic, conversational, and written form of both languages. Our world is becoming more inter-connected than ever. The ability to speak and write more than one language fluently is an invaluable asset. Through Dual Language, our students have the opportunity to learn and develop through project-based learning in both languages, preparing them to be leaders in our increasingly globalized world. English Language Learners make up a large portion of our population at PS 153. In a very similar way to our Dual Language students we celebrate and make sure they know the value of bilingualism. Our ELL program focuses on multicultural education where students have the opportunity to learn English through written material and performance tasks that are relevant to their daily lives. As a PS 153 community, we strive to provide support for our English Language Learners beyond the school day. Our after school program for ELLS and our Saturday Academy for ELLS provide students with additional opportunities to develop and practice English through fun and engaging activities like group art projects and games focused on communication and team work. Gifted and Talented Students also bring their own unique strengths and needs to our community. The teachers within this program work diligently to gain deep understanding of each of their students talents and abilities and capitalize on these strengths to facilitate a learning environment that is consistently shifting instruction from student-centered to student-driven. With a heavy focus on the arts, our Gifted and Talented students are constantly immersed in inquiry based learning that requires critical thinking and communication. At PS 153, we strive to help build adaptive learning opportunities for all children including those children with exceptional needs. When our Special Education Team determines that an Individualized Education Plan is required, the aim of the placement is to maximize the development of the child within the least restrictive environment possible. Special Education functions within and as part of the regular school framework. Within this framework, the function of special education is to participate in the creation and maintenance of a total educational environment suitable for all children. Our special educators can foster the development of specialized resources from not only their contributions but the contributions of other members of our greater instructional community. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reflecting on the progress and strides we have made in the 2017-2018 school year, one major area of growth for the PS 153 community is the collaboration among staff. PS 153’s instructional community operates through a common belief in distributive leadership and shared accountability. Using an inquiry approach that focuses on improved student learning across all grades and programs, our grade teams, specialized teams, and instructional cabinet meet multiple times a week to analyze student work and data, share resources, and participate in focused, 1  solution centered discussions. Through these professional exercises, every member of the instructional team becomes a major stakeholder in the success of every student in the school community. Designing Coherent Instruction and 3c Engaging Students in Learning: School wide professional development, observation feedback, and cycles of learning will align and focus on using the Gradual Release of Responsibility Framework (I do, we do, you do it together, you do it independently). This will support teacher is designing coherent instruction that is aligned, paced, and provides students the opportunity to engage in deep thinking for the majority of the period. Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson framework for teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. We will use the Gradual Release of Responsibility Framework (I do, we do, you do it together, you do it independently) as the foundation of our instructional practices. This will give teachers, coaches, and administrators common language to discuss the elements of a lesson, the alignment, the pacing, and assessment practices. Importantly, it will be the framework that allows us to create student-centered classrooms. Teachers will continue to participate in lab-sites focused around the Reading & Writing process. We are currently using the Teachers College reading and writing curricula in order to reflect and deepen our set of beliefs about how students learn to read. We have consultants provide 20 full days of PD each year. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M153 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 589 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 40 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 88.5% % Reduced Lunch 29.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 74.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.1 2% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 79% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 61 60 93.3% 3.7% 13.6% 17.3% 2.2% 1.5% 6 23% 7.3 36.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the available data reveals that although our students, on average, produce high quality class work with the support of their teachers, about 30% are proficient in Math and ELA. In 2017-18, 34% of our students scored proficient on the State ELA exam, and 36.9% scored proficient State Math exam. Our 2018-19 iReady data is similar, with 29% of students meeting their ELA growth expectations and 30% of students meeting their math growth expectations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students in grades 3, 4, and 5 will show progress in ELA evidenced by a 4% increase in the 2019 State Assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Data and Progress Monitoring · Students will take a computer adaptive assessment at beginning of the year in ELA and Math to determine their proficiency level and running records every 6 weeks. · We will set growth expectations for each student. · The Instructional Cabinet will collect and analyze student performance data on a monthly basis. · Teacher teams will collect and analyze student performance data monthly on "data dive" days. They will also utilize a "Looking at Student Work" protocol to learn from student work on a monthly basis. · Teachers will adjust instruction based on what they learn from the data and student work. · Students will take an end of year assessment, and we will determine what percentage of each class met their growth projections for the year. Curriculum and Professional Learning ELA-- Implementation of The Teachers College Reading and Writing Project units of study. Math-- incorporate Terc and Engage NY into our units of study from Go Math. Professional learning sessions will include: ● Calendar Days (provided by Teachers College) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018- June 2019 All students grades 1-5, including ENLs and SWD School leaders, teacher team leaders, instructional coach, IEP teacher, ENL teacher, teacher teams September 2018- June 2019 All students grades 1-5, including ENLs and SWD School leaders, teacher team leaders, instructional coach, IEP teacher, ENL teacher, teacher teams 5 Parents of students in grades 4 and 5 September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, instructional coaches, ENL teacher, related service providers, school leaders, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors ● Lab sites for modeling best strategies in the readers' and writers' workshops (provided by Teachers College) Foundational Reading Skills Unit planning in Math and ELA Using Assessment in Instruction in Math and ELA Building Teacher Teams Using Protocols to Learn about our Students "Data Dives" Looking at Student Work ELA Curriculum Parent Workshops ● ELA Family Night ● HW sheets that explain to parents what their child is learning. ● Classroom Newsletters which inform parents about literacy homework and classroom math information and lessons ● Parent Teacher conferences where parents have the opportunity to meet with their child’s teacher and learn about their child’s current and individualized ELA. ● Scores and performance ● Monthly Progress Reports with current literacy performance broken down by current unit of study ● IEP Annual Review Meetings where parents are informed of their child’s literacy progress, performance and measurable annual goals as well as strategies to assist them in reaching their measurable annual goals. ● ELA Parent Workshops which inform parents about the ELA CCSS, what their children are learning in ELA and how they can best assist with reading and literacy skills at home. ● Building classroom libraries. ● Engaging texts ● Built a new library 6 Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. All Students All Students PreK- 5 PreK-5 Classroom teachers, instructional coaches, ENL teacher, related service providers, school leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. ● Classroom Newsletters which inform parents about literacy homework and classroom math information and lessons. ● Parent Teacher conferences where parents have the opportunity to meet with their child’s teacher and learn about their child’s current and individualized ELA scores and performance. ● Monthly Progress Reports with current literacy performance broken down by current unit of study. ● IEP Annual Review Meetings where parents are informed of their child’s literacy progress, performance and measurable annual goals as well as strategies to assist them in reaching their measurable annual goals. ● ELA and Math Curriculum Parent Workshops Schoolwide Events ● ELA Family Night ● Family Fun Fridays ● Publishing parties Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize the following resources: ● Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curricula ● Go Math and Terc curricula ● iReady literacy and assessment program ● After school programs ● Saturday school 7  ● Open technology access for English Language Learners ● Non-fiction libraries ● Spanish language libraries ● Math manipulatives ● Teachers College calendar days (estimated 45 days) ● Teachers College lab sites (estimated 20 days) ● Weekly school wide professional development (looking at student work, data analysis, curriculum revision) ● Twice weekly grade team meetings (planning and curriculum revision) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Year ELA and math assessments will be conducted by February 16, 2019. The midpoint goal is that the percent of students meeting growth expectations in grades 1-5 will have increase by 3 percentage points in ELA and Math, as compared to the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) To monitor our mid-point progress, we will utilize: ● iReady math and ELA computer adaptive exams ● Reading Running Records ● Literacy Conference Labels ● Math end of unit exams ● Math quizzes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017-2018, School Quality Snapshot, 95% of parents responded positively to questions about supportive environment. This is 11% higher that the district and city averages. In order to challenge students to grow and support them to meet high expectations, we plan to provide more opportunities for students to set goals, meet them, and be publicly celebrated. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have held at least 20 school wide celebrations of student achievement, progress, and diversity. 100% of our student population will be publicly recognized for their successes and contribution to our school community. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? At least twice per month, students will be publicly celebrated for their achievements (performance in a subject, growth, attendance, PeaceBuilder skills, etc). All students at P.S. 153M September 2018--June 2019 School leaders, teachers, and social workers Teachers will maintain records of each event and who was celebrated. By June, all students, including ESLs and SWDs, will have been recognized for an honor or achievement. All students at P.S. 153M Teachers will invite parents to at least half of the events, and we will photograph the events. All students at P.S. 153M  o There will be weekly events where individual All students at P.S. 153M students are celebrated for their achievement, monthly events will be held where parents will be invited to celebrate student achievement, as well as annual events where student achievement will be celebrated. September 2018--June 2019 September 2018--June 2019 September 2018--June 2019 all teachers School leaders, all teachers, social workers School leaders, all teachers, social workers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to celebrate their children's academic achievements and progress throughout the year during these activities: WEEKLY Student of the week in each class/celebrating student progress and achievement MONTHLY   Perfect Attendance for that month  Musician of the Month from each grade  Athlete of the Month from each grade  Reader/ Writer of the Month from each class  Mathematician of the Month from each class 0   Peace Builder of the Month from each class THROUGHOUT THE YEAR Spirit Week  Publishing Parties  Math Competitions Favorite Storybook Character Day   Winter/Holiday Arts Performance   Dr. Seuss Day  March Madness  Multicultural Day  PS 153 Olympics/ Field Day    Graduation Spring Arts Performance Stepping Up Ceremony Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources-- School leaders, teachers, instructional coaches, related service providers, and specialists will form committees to lead each event. Schedule-- allocated time for planning committees to meet for each event. Instructional-- professional development on investing students and goal-setting. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of January 2019, we will have held at least 10 school wide events that celebrated half of our students. Parents will have attended at least 5 of the events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Schedule of events   Parent sign in sheets  Teacher records of which students have been recognized for specified achievements. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Feedback from the Principal's spring PPO of 2018 indicated that we provide structured teacher team meetings on a weekly basis where teachers clearly hold each other accountable for the decisions and adjustments made to the curricula. Teacher teams systematically analyze key elements of classroom practice, assessment results and student work. Teachers use student's work to identify patterns and trends and utilize this data analysis to make adjustments to the curricula. We plan to deepen this work during SY 2018-2019 by engaging in formal month long cycles of data analysis and curriculum revision as we adopt more of the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated in twice monthly teacher team meetings to conduct Math and ELA data dives and looking at student work protocols.    September- May— during Monday Professional Learning: (1 session) 30 minute teacher team data dive ELA and 30 minute teacher team data dive math (1 session) 15 minute teacher team presentation of student data and 45 minute Looking at Student Work protocol (1 session) teacher team curriculum revision/ development— Math (Go Math, Terc, EngageNY, iReady) (1 session) teacher team curriculum revision/ development— ELA (Teacher’s College, EngageNY, iReady) June Professional Learning     Data share and celebrations of student learning  Reflections on the year  Planning for next year 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Monthly 30 minute teacher team data dive ELA and 30 minute teacher team data dive math  Monthly 15 minute teacher team presentation of student data and 45 minute Looking at Student Work protocol  Monthly teacher team curriculum revision/ development for math (Go Math, Terc, EngageNY, iReady)  Monthly teacher team curriculum revision/ development for ELA (Teacher’s College, EngageNY, iReady) To address the needs of ELLs and Students with Disabilities, teachers at PS 153 receive professional learning workshops about current trends, practices and strategies to better support students in these subgroups. Teachers will have the opportunity to participate in inquiry groups that will focus on researching the best practices for ELLS and Students with disabilities. Peer Lab sites/ intervisitations will be conducted in order for teachers to be able to learn from the modeling of best teaching practices. Parents will be provided with information about curriculum through a variety of workshops. Monthly open houses or publishing parties will be offered to give the parents an opportunity to visit teacher’s classroom and be informed of a different strategies they can use to help their children. Section 5C – Capacity Framework Element - Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers of P.S. 153M September 2018--June 2019 School leaders, all teachers, instructional coaches Teachers, ESLs, SWDs September 2018--June 2019 School leaders, all teachers, instructional coaches, ENL teacher Parents of students in Pre-K-5 th grade September 2018--June 2019 All teachers of P.S. 153M September 2018--June 2019 School leaders, all teachers, instructional coaches, ENL teacher School leaders, all teachers, instructional coaches, guidance counselors How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 3  Each month parents are invited to classroom publishing parties where they can learn about their child's work for that unit and celebrate their portfolio work. Classroom teachers and grade teams will be responsible for implementing these events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources-- School leaders, instructional coaches, team leaders, teacher teams Instructional resources-- iReady data, portfolio data, end of unit tests, other student work Schedule adjustments-- Monday professional learning time, grade team meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, all teachers will have participated in 6 cycles of data analysis and curriculum revision, resulting in improved student performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher team binders, student performance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A current strength of our school is the way in which teachers collaborate to drive student achievement. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot:  100% of teachers say that they work together to design instructional programs  100% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school  97% of teachers say that they feel responsible that all students learn. However, we still have room to improve and make progress in terms of student achievement. It is our belief that as we develop teacher leaders, we will strengthen our teacher teams, which ultimately will positively impact student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers and school administrators will engage in at least four learning walks, four lab site visits and engage in collaborative inquiry to increase reading and math skills evidenced by a 10% school wide increase on iReady end of year assessments. Takeaways from learning walks and lab sites will inform further professional development and teachers will unpack the work during grade team meetings. In this way, the professional development will be more personalized and occur both schoolwide and at the grade level. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher leaders, instructional coaches September 2018--June 2019 School leaders Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders will meet with an Extended Cabinet weekly to provide support in:  Building a teacher team  Running an effective meeting  Supporting a team through curriculum revision (including implementation of The Teachers College Reading and Writing Project)  Using protocols to maximize adult learning  Developing personal leadership through reflection and feedback Leading Learning Walks   Hosting lab sites for Teachers College September 2018--June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 School leaders, teacher leaders School leaders, teacher leaders Teacher leaders will meet twice a week with their teams to analyze data, revise curriculum, and plan to meet the needs of ESLs and SWDs. Teachers and students Teacher Leaders, Instructional Coaches Professional learning topics for Monday Professional Learning include:  Building a teacher team  Running an effective meeting  Supporting a team through curriculum revision (including implementation of The Teachers College Reading and Writing Project).  Using protocols to maximize adult learning.  Developing personal leadership through reflection and feedback Leading Learning Walks   Hosting lab sites for Teachers College 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator will hold monthly parent meetings and workshops on a variety of topics about student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources-- school leadership, teacher leaders, teacher teams Instructional resources-- data from math and ELA, student work Schedule-- weekly extended cabinet meetings and twice weekly grade team meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, lead teachers will have participated in at least 15 professional development sessions and led at least 30 team meetings about how to monitor student progress and adjust curriculum accordingly. This will lead to improved student performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting sign in sheets, iReady data, teacher surveys, iReady, running records, periodic assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our annual School Survey indicated that our parents would like to be more involved in our school activities. They also provided feedback through the parent teacher association. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 95% of our parents will have engaged in at least 2 school activities other than parent teacher conferences. This will be evidenced by parent and guardian attendance sheets from workshops, activities, and open house events which inform parents how students make progress; high expectations, and decreasing student absenteeism. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff led workshops for parents Literacy Publishing Parties Monthly Open Houses (Visiting Classrooms) Curl Up with a Great Book Day Math Competitions Parent Curriculum Workshops (Literacy & Math Specific) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All of our parents September 2018- June 2019 Parents, school leaders, classroom teachers, instructional coaches, guidance counselors, SAPIS worker, parent association, SLT, Understanding Common Core Expectations Attending Cultural field Trips Attendance/Decreasing Absenteeism Dress Up as your Favorite Character Day Math Nights Literacy Nights Increase school involvement 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Boys and Girls Club of Harlem; COMPASS/Nasery Afterschool, City College of NY; Break it Up Switch it Down. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  Classroom teachers, instructional coaches, school leaders, support staff, specialists, school community. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, 45% of our parents will have engaged in school activities other than parent teacher conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Records Parent Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Guided Reading GO MATH RTI Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) The reading levels would be utilized to determine the students in need of AIS for the early grades and the NYS ELA scores for the upper grades. The baseline assessments and the end of the chapter assessments would be utilized to determine the students in need of AIS for the lower grades. The NYS Math scores would be utilized to determine the students in the upper grades. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All services are provided during the school day and afterschool All services are provided during the school day and afterschool Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Students receive intervention with teacher scaffolding through weekly conferences, strategy groups and differentiated instruction in ELA. Groups are differentiated based on DRA reading levels. Small group instruction three times per week – 45 minutes. Students receive intervention with teacher scaffolding through weekly conferences, strategy groups and differentiated instruction in Math. Groups are differentiated using the predictive diagnostic assessment data. Small group instruction using performance indicator to address student needs. Small group tutoring four times per week, 45 minutes . 1  Science FOSS Science Support Teachers would identify the students through their observations/ data collection/ conference notes. Social Studies NYS Social Studies Core Curriculum Teachers would identify the students through their observations/ data collection/ conference notes. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) The guidance counselors, school psychologist and social workers would identify the students at risk at their SIT Kinvolved, PEACEBUILDERSand other socio-emotional counseling and support Students receive intervention with teacher scaffolding through weekly conferences, strategy groups and differentiated instruction in Science. Groups are differentiated using the predictive diagnostic assessment data. Small group instruction using performance indicator to address student needs. Small group tutoring four times per week, 45 minutes. Students receive intervention with teacher scaffolding through weekly conferences, strategy groups and differentiated instruction in Social Studies. Assessing students’ progress via observations and End of Unit projects. Integration of fiction and non-fiction reading into units of study three 45 minutes sessions per week. Focus on contend area reading to support comprehension of non-fiction text. For 3 rd , 4th, & 5th grade students counseling focuses on the socio-emotional needs that may prevent students All services are provided during the school day and afterschool All services are provided during the school day and afterschool All services are provided during the school day and afterschool 2  meetings. Teachers could also recommend students for these interventions. from developing effectivelearning skills. Individual counseling focuses on students’ difficulties with self-esteem, separation anxiety, sadness, loss and bereavement and aggressive behaviors. Group counseling is delivered to reinforce group dynamic skills and to foster interactions amongst students. Meetings with parents take place to develop a proactive plan for students, as well as to discuss crisis of children with some level of emotional needs. School social workers serves our high risk students and families with social/emotion counseling and support. K, 1st & 2 nd grade students receive counseling addresses students’ emotional/behavioral difficulties, as they can impact on academic learning. Individual counseling focuses on students’ difficulties with self-esteem, separation anxiety, sadness, loss and bereavement and aggressive behaviors. Group counseling is delivered to reinforce group dynamic skills and to foster interactions amongst students. Meetings 3  with parents take place to develop a proactive plan for students, as well as to discuss crisis of children with some level of emotional needs. 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  Total number of students in temporary housing - 123  Percentage of students - 16.75 Saturday Academy/Instructional Intervention and Enrichment   Differentiated academic intervention and enrichment through iReady  Parent Workshops   Emergency supplies will be provided such as school uniforms, school supplies, and personal care supplies  Social/Emotional or At Risk Counseling by guidance counselor and/or social workers Special Field Trips to Cultural Institutions Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our teachers are HQT as of BEDS report from 2017-2018. P.S. 153M has a hiring committee. This committee meets regularly, not only to establish the rubric to be used during the hiring process but also to ensure that the new teachers have the support they need. Our new teachers participate in the mentoring program and are paired with our staff according to their needs. All teachers are supported with at least weekly professional development, collaborative teacher team meetings, frequent observation and feedback cycles, and open communication. Based on Quality Review feedback about developing a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best, much of this work is focused on Designing Coherent Instruction and Engaging Students in Learning. The Gradual Release of Responsibility Framework is foundational to our instructional practices. Staff retention is achieved through a variety of strategies and factors. The school has a safe environment and an inclusive culture that supports progress towards the school’s professional, academic and social-emotional learning goals. Our staff is included in the decision-making process of the school. Our school provides high quality professional development offered by not only our staff but by consultants according to the DOE regulations. Teachers are able to work collaboratively in teacher teams and support each other. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our school personnel, including teachers and paraprofessionals, receive professional development during preparation periods, faculty conferences, professional learning sessions, intervisitations, and following learning walks/instructional rounds. In addition, our school personnel participate in outside professional development offered by Go Math, and Teq Smart Boards. Furthermore, there are professional development days assigned by the Chancellor in which our staff receives ADVANCE professional development. Some of the topics covered during professional development are: Go Math, Danielson Framework, new teacher evaluation, incorporating DOK and UDL into the literacy block and using 21 st Century skills and technology to teach English, supporting newly arrived ELLs. Professional development will be differentiated based on the teachers’ needs. Professional development is provided by our principal, assistant principals, mentor teachers, teacher effectiveness coach, grade team leaders, and outside consultants. 7  The principal and assistant principals attend regular professional development sessions provided by the district focusing on observation cycles and providing high quality feedback to teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our Pre- K staff provide workshops and information to the parents of our Pre-K students in order to prepare them for kindergarten. Our Pre-K program is aligned with the CCLS and utilizes the Early Childhood Environmental Rating System – Revised (ECERS-R). The teachers participate in professional learning opportunities with the K-5 faculty, which most frequently focuses on Designing Coherent Instruction, Engaging Students in Learning, and creating a student-centered classroom. In terms of supporting Pre-K students socially and emotionally, we have a Pre-K social worker who comes twice a month and a full time who supports the students and teachers as well. They provide individualized professional development to teachers about was to effectively transition students, manage oppositional behaviors, work on anxiety and separation issues, and support parents in the process of transitioning their child into the classroom or other areas of the building. Our Pre-K students start their transition process at the beginning of June. They visit the kindergarten classes and meet the current kindergarten teachers. We offer school tours as well as orientations for the new students. Our Pre-K family worker assists our Pre-K students with their transitions. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 8  Our teachers participate in the use and selection of assessments in their teacher teams. One of the most recently selected assessments and instructional tools is iReady. A consultant from iReady has provided professional development to the staff about how to use the program and assessments to provide targeted instruction. Teacher team meetings are also conducted in order to analyze the assessments and inform instruction. Teachers use their data such as reading levels, performance based assessments, iReady, and conference notes to be able to identify a student’s weakness and strength. Using their data, teachers are able to develop activities that will help each child obtain mastery in a particular strand. The data also provides teachers information on how they are going to develop their groups for differentiated instruction. Teachers use their data to develop assessments and projects that will enrich or provide practice for students. Teachers use their data to create projection sheets; they are able to develop goals and projections for their class. During the team meetings, teachers share their data to have discussions on specific strategies they can use with their students so they can reach their full potential. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X x X x X Column B Section Reference(s) 3a, 3b, 5d 3a, 3b 3a, 3b 3a, 3b Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 381,637.00 79,394.00 22,350.00 0 3,011,439.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 9  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 153M, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 153M will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s parent involvement policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade- level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 2  ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 153M, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve state standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● Using academic learning time efficiently; 3  ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. 4  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities are to: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 5  ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities are to: III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: After analyzing the data (IReady, Teachers' College running records, NYS 2018 ELA /MATH scores and NYSESLAT 2018 scores) for our ELL population, we determined that there is a need for a Saturday Science Academy. Thirty percent of our ELLs scored levels EN and EM on the NYSESLAT 2018. The Saturday Science Academy will focus on advancing literacy through science, and it will run from November 2018 through May 2019 from 10:00 am - 1:00 pm. There will be approximately 20 sessions in which the students will be using Amplify as supplementary to FOSS. This will equip students with linguistic tools needed to express their content knowledge. Our ELL students will receive instruction through different modalities in order to enhance their English Language Arts skills and content knowledge. There will be a total of 5 classes (Stand Alone) of ELLs- two classes in grade 2, one class in grades 3, 4, and 5. There will be about 15 students per class. The groups will consist of the students who scored EN or EM in the NYSESLAT 2018. It will be done through hands on investigations, interactive read aloud to promote critical thinking, projects, on line activities and the implementation of academic language in conversations. One of the units that students will be focusing on is Ecology and as a culminating activity, on Earth Day, students will plant trees around the school. students will also express content knowledge learned using the four essential language skills of reading, writing, speaking and listening. In terms of staffing, the students will be serviced by four certified ESL and/or Bilingual teachers and one content area teacher. Any additional needed funds for the Title III program will be from other school funding sources. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The teachers providing instruction for the Saturday Science Academy will participate in professional learning provided by iReady, our teacher effectiveness team, and our ESL teacher. The iReady professional development educates teachers on how to use the program to assess students' reading levels, target instruction, create guided reading lessons, and use data to inform instruction. in-house professional learning will concentrate on creating a student-centered learning environment, which includes collaborative learning activities that promote peer interaction and helps the development of language and content. A second key aspect of professional development is developing the literacy skills of our our ELLs by using the I do, we 8  Part C: Professional Development do, you do model of instruction. Additionally, we will provide workshops on the SIOP model and using different points of entry in the lessons in order to help the students to at least make one year's progress in literacy. This professional development will be provided during grade meetings, on Mondays from 2:20- 3:40, and/or Tuesdays from 3:00 - 3:35 pm. from October through May. The teachers will be encouraged to participate in the professional developments provided by the ELLs office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The parents are very active in our school community. Our parents of ELLs, are an integral part of our planning each year. Our parents of ELLs have a parents’ orientation several times a year. At the beginning of the school year, and then at various times through formal interviews and informal conversations during the school's weekly Tuesday parent engagement time. This time is allocated to inform parents about their children's academic and social growth. Teachers and social workers are always available to answer any questions and concerns that parents may have. Our ELL parents are always invited to join any of the field trips and school wide events for example, multicultural day, literacy and math night, respect for all week, where teachers talk about diversity and respecting other peoples culture . Additionally, P.S. 153 provides materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their academic achievement; (ex. adult ENL classes, ThinkCentral, which is an online math program that is aligned to the common core curriculum.) Our ELL parents have the opportunity to participate in ENL classes. These classes are provided in the evenings (Tuesdays and Thursdays) by our ESL and/ or Bilingual teachers. We provide childcare for the parents. In September, we will be offering a workshop on ELL accommodation and Preparation for City and State Assessments (ELA, MATH and NYSESLAT). These workshops would be provided by the classroom teachers and support staff too. At that time, we will share strategies on how parents can further support and help students navigate these tests. At the end of November, we provide workshops on TC, Go Math and Technology as expressed by the parent community. These workshops are facilitated by classroom teachers and support staff. Workshops are conducted in English and Spanish. Parents will be notified of these activities by our digital information board, KInvolved, weekly homework sheets, flyers/newsletters backpacked in the parents' preferred language as indicated on the Home Language Identification Survey. Records of these activities are kept in the parent activity binder. 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Conceptually Consolidated Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) Conceptually Consolidated  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated Conceptually Consolidated 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name Adam Clayton Powell Jr Borough Manhattan School Number 153 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Karen Bailey Coach Angela Torres ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Evelyn Mbame Teacher/Subject Area Courtney Donovan/ Special Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Sol Idalia Flores Coach School Counselor Yira Ramirez Parent type here Parent Coordinator Stephanie Pratt Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 701 Total number of ELLs 231 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 32.95% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish/English Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 3 4 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 8 0 0 8 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At P.S. 153M, we utilize DRA to assess the early literacy skills. This data shows us were are our students standing in terms of literacy skills. It gives us a base line to form instruction and develop the students' goals for the year. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2  Once the State tests are available, we look at our data to ensure that we are meeting aour targts, including our AYP for ELLs. Since we are meeting our goals, this tells us that our programs are successful. The results of the state and citywide tests inform our school community as to the success of our programs. In addition, the students's PBA, DRA, baseline assessments, and end of the unit assessments let us know how our programs are doing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] After the students are assessed with the DRA, the data collected is utilzed the different tiers (Tier 1, 2, or 3) in order to differentiate the instruction. The teachers utilize the information to make lessons meaningful, to develop language skills and complex thinking. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our NYSESLAT data shows that the majority of our students are in the Expanding stage. Our ELLs are improving in terms of literacy skills. Our NYSITELL data shows that many of our newly enrolled Kindergarten ELL students are English proficient by passing the NYSITELL. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 1. As per CR Part 154.2, there are 2 types of ENL: • Stand-alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. • Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. In this program the teacher ensures that ELLs are held to the same high standards as native speakers. This is done through ENL methodology and strategies. Various scaffolding methods such as teaching academic vocabulary, modeling, integrating oral and written language instruction into content area teaching. Use of instructional tools such as visuals, short videos and graphic organizers to make text comprehensible. All classrooms have technology like computers and smart boards to meet the different learning styles of ELLs. The ENL teacher works in collaboration with classroom teachers to plan lessons and deliver instruction through the use of graphic organizers, webs, charts, manipulatives, and TPR method. In PS 153M we also use “the language of response”, sentence starters and think pair share to improve conversation and facilitate learning. Ells receive all instruction in a pull out program offered by our 3  ESL teacher. ESL program models are both heterogeneously mixed according to academic and linguistic proficiency. b. TBE program. If applicable. At P.S. 153M we do not have a Transitional Bilinual Program at this moment. c. DL program. If applicable. Ells receive all instruction in a side by side model. That is, the students change classrooms each day between English and Spanish. Dual Language program models are both heterogeneously mixed according to academic and linguistic proficiency. In this program the teacher ensures that ELLs are held to the same high standards as native speakers. This is done through ENL methodology and strategies. Various scaffolding methods such as teaching academic vocabulary, modeling, integrating oral and written language instruction into content area teaching. Use of instructional tools such as visuals, short videos and graphic organizers to make text comprehensible. All classrooms have technology like computers and smart boards to meet the different learning styles of ELLs. Both DL teacher collaborate to plan lessons and deliver instruction through the use of graphic organizers, webs, charts, manipulatives, and TPR method. In PS 153M we also use “the language of response”, sentence starters and think pair share to improve conversation and facilitate learning. Ells receive all instruction in a pull out program offered by our ESL teacher. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the Dual Language program, ESL/ELA, and ENL are provided in a one to one ratio. This is a side-by-side model, in which the teachers remain stationary and each class alternates between teachers on alternate days. Therefore, fifty percent of instruction is delivered in English and fifty percent in Spanish. As per CR Part 154.2, students in all different levels have mandated instructional minutes. We see to it that students meet their mandates. CR part 154.2 mandates that all ENL classes provide instructional time according to proficiency level. Entering and emerging receive two units of study per week(360minutes) , transition and expanding receive one unit of study per week (180minutes) , and commanding, who are proficient or former ELLs, must continue to receive 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL services for an additional 2 years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At PS 153 content is made comprehensible by using the sheltered instruction observation (SIOP) protocol. A research based and validated model that has proven effective in addressing the academic needs of ELLs. The lessons have a learning objective and a language objective. We use speech that is appropriate for students proficiency level, academic tasks are clearly explained, a wide variety of technics to make content clear is used. For example, modeling, use of visuals, demos, and hands on activities. We consistently use scaffolding technics throughout the lesson, including a variety of question types that promote higher order thinking skills. Dual Language model provides instruction in both English and a second language; in our case, Spanish is the second language. This approach allows English learners to help native English speakers learn through a second language, while native English speakers help English Learners acquire language and the curriculum through English. We also use think alouds, think pair share, where students are allowed time to process a question, verbalize it to a peer and then volunteer the answer to the class. Use of cognates, accept students contributions in their native language (L1) during class discussions then repeat back in English what they said. Classrooms are labeled in English and Spanish. The teacher accepts initial writing in the native language as students transition to English writing. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 4  The DRA is provided to the students three times a year. Also, the end of the unit assessments for Go Math and Ready Gen are provided. Furthermore, teacher observations and conference notes are utilize to monitor the students' progress and inform instruction 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. Our goal is to introduce or reintroduce SIFE students into a school setting and provide them with the tools that they need to successfully learn English, make academic gains, and learn to navigate American culture. We differentiate instruction within the classroom by providing them with materials that are both age appropriate and meet them at their linguistic and instructional level. We also stream students to classrooms where they can engage in learning foundations of reading and pairing up with buddies who speak their native language. Finally, we offer students the opportunity to spend their lunch periods in Lunch Bunch with a guidance counselor and other students so that they can develop social and linguistic skills in a small and nurturing environment. B. These students are engaged in the same curriculum as the rest of the student body, but they receive additional linguistic support and more small group instruction in ESL and Dual Language settings. The classroom teachers focus heavily on reading, writing, listening, and speaking through the use of technology because we have found that it invokes a high student interest. They engage in interactive work online and build linguistic skills in that manner. These students are also targeted for 37 ½ minutes, Extended Day, Saturday Academy, and PIP. C. We know that these students are traditionally very strong in listening and speaking, but they struggle to gain proficiency in reading, writing, and the content areas. Therefore, in conjunction with their teacher, each of these students create personal goals for each unit of study. These goals address their specific areas of need and motivate students to work beyond their former expectations. Teachers and students assess and realign goals in one-on-one conferences based on data from ITAs and Predictive Assessments. This individual attention and progress monitoring is key to preventing students from becoming long-term ELLs. D. Long-term ELLs are students who have not benefited enough from the traditional classroom experience including differentiated instruction and individual goal setting. Therefore, their needs necessitate a more aggressive form of academic intervention. This involves additional tutoring in both English and their native language, if possible. E. Based on the NYSESLAT scores, former ELLs are mandated to receive up to 2 years of service of 90 minutes of instruction per week after they exit the ELL program or become proficient. Furthermore, ELLs and former ELLs have testing accommodations on the NYS ELA and other content area assessments. Half time extensions such as time and a half, also have separate locations. Which provides optimal testing environment for ELLs. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, third reading only in ELA if one exists, and the simultaneous use of English and alternative materials. On the contrary, since NYSESLAT is designed specifically for ELLs, testing accommodations ordinarily permitted for ELLs taking other state tests are not permitted for NYSESLAT. 5  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our teachers of ELL- SWD utilize Ready Gen,Go Math, and the other core curriculum that the regular classes utilize. They also implement the ELL modalities. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Flexible scheduling is done through the pull out program. Within this program the teacher, provides intensive academic instruction which also assists the students with the acceleration of language development. We will ensure that the instructional plans for each child with an IEP are kept by constantly revising their IEP and their classroom goals. At the end of each unit in each curriculum area an assessment is done in order to monitor the srudents' progress. At this time, the IEP goals as well as their instructional goals would be revised by the IEP team. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Over the past few years, data has shown that lower grade content area intervention is most needed in ELA. For that reason, we have purchased a new reading program that will be used to supplement Ready Gen. Along with building literacy skills, Reading Street also has an ESL component that will allow teachers to do more direct instruction on grammar and vocabulary building. In the upper grades, we have found that ELLs more commonly need intervention in both ELA and math. They are eligible to participate in PIP groups, extended day, extended day after school, Saturday Academy, and bilingual SETTS if they speak Spanish. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? At this moment we are utilizing the new curriculum of Ready Gen and Go Math. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this moment we are not discontinuing any programs or services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have the same access to school programs, if not more. They are able to join any club or team including but not limited to boys and girls soccer, boys and girls basketball, cheerleading, boys and girls track, orchestra, and vocal club. In addition, we have a Saturday Program for second grade ELLs. We invite our students through flyers, letters, and conversations with their parents. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs use the same instructional materials as other students, but they may use them in different ways or with different frequency. For example, ELLs tend to use math manipulatives and hands-on materials more often to help demonstrate understanding. They also require additional resources, particularly in literacy. Picture dictionaries, thesauruses, and books/materials in the native language are common resources. Additionally, ELLs benefit greatly from using technology such as brainpop.com, unitedstreaming.com, teachervision.com, educationplace.com, and starfall.com. These websites create a visual and auditory learning experience for students and help them to gain English proficiency, content area knowledge, and literacy skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In Dual Language, native language support is abundant. Every other day ELLs receive 100% of their instruction in their native language as well as all of their materials and assessments. In ESL, native language support is more subtle and includes books in 6  the native language, partners who speak their language, and when possible, native language support from the teacher him/herself. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We know that learning a second or third language is extremely challenging and will affect a child’s self-esteem in a profoundly positive or negative manner. We take great precautions to ensure that our instructional decisions and use of materials build a child’s confidence and help them to discover their greatest abilities as a learner. Therefore, we provide supports and resources that will be appropriate for each child considering their level of English proficiency, their academic standing, and their age. We use the students` language to help in building oral language development tin their first language and to develop enhance their cognitive skills as they are acquiring the target language. We provide supports such as scaffolding the lessons, charts with language of response, manipulatives, asn so on. Translation of tests are provided when available. We also have a buddy system –new arrivals partnered with advanced ells fluent in both languages. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs use the same instructional materials as other students, but they may use them in different ways or with different frequency. For example, ELLs tend to use math manipulatives and hands-on materials more often to help demonstrate understanding. They also require additional resources, particularly in literacy. Picture dictionaries, thesauruses, and books/materials in the native language are common resources. Additionally, ELLs benefit greatly from using technology such as brainpop.com, unitedstreaming.com, teachervision.com, educationplace.com, and starfall.com. These websites create a visual and auditory learning experience for students and help them to gain English proficiency, content area knowledge, and literacy skills. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In previous years, new entrants have participated in Title III programs focusing on orientation towards New York City and American culture. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? A. All students, whether EPs or ELLs, receive 50% of their instruction in English and 50% in Spanish. B. EPs and ELLs are integrated for 100% of the instructional day. Our model strives to have 50% EPs and 50% ELLs in each class, although those percentages change as ELLs become proficient in English. All content areas are taught by the classroom teacher within the regular school day. C. Students alternate between teachers each day so that they receive instruction in English from one 7  teacher on one day and in Spanish from the other teacher the next day. The only exception is that the students remain with the same teacher for writing for the duration of one month. This way they have time to focus on and develop skills in one language at a time. D. We use the side-by-side model, in which teachers remain stationary and students alternate between teachers each day. Therefore, they receive one full day of instruction in Spanish and the following day they receive English instruction, with the exception of writing, which is taught in one language for a month at a time. E. Both languages are taught at the same time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL personnel will receive professional development during the assigned time every Monday and Tuesday, during lab sites, and following learning walks/instructional rounds. Specifically, the PD will include incorporating Ready Gen and Go Math, using science and technology to teach English, and supporting newly arrived ELLs in the upper grades. For example, in literacy, staff would get professional learning opportunities in Read Alouds, developing vocabulary, reading strategies, and so on. Also, all staff is required to write their own professional development plan. This information would be used to design professional learning opportunities to the staff members. ELL personnel will receive professional development during the assigned time every Monday and Tuesday, during lab sites, and following learning walks/instructional rounds. Specifically, the PD will include incorporating Ready Gen and Go Math, using science and technology to teach English, and supporting newly arrived ELLs in the upper grades. For example, in literacy, staff would get professional learning opportunities in Read Alouds, developing vocabulary, reading strategies, and so on. Also, all staff is required to write their own professional development plan. This information would be used to design professional learning opportunities to the staff members. We will aslo offer professional learning opportunities for the SIOP model as well as other modalities to address the ELL population. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. On a weekly basis, the support staff provides fifth grade teachers and students with an assembly that focuses on adolescent behavior and physical changes, appropriate social conduct, cultural diversity, and discovering a career path. They also provide support to our Fifth graders as they transition to middle school. They offer workshops to parents to also support them in this process. Our guidance counselors attend professional learning activities provided by the DOE too. In addition, they attend professional learning opportunities provided by other entities such as NABE. Our schedule is designed in a manner that provides ample time to have professional learning every Tuesday and Thursday besides the already designated time on Mondays and Tuesdays for professional learning. This ensure that our staff would receive more that the required time for professional learning. All staff, including assistant principals, ENL coordinator, secretaries and parent coordinator, will receive the same professional development that is described above for ENL and Dual Language teachers. We believe that all of us are teachers of ELLs, regardless of the program in which we teach. This PD will 8  occur during the designated time on Mondays and Tuesdays, during our scheduled time on Tuesdays and Thursdays, during lab sites, and following learning walks. Our records of agendas and signing sheets are kept in the ELL binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have an active Parent Teacher Association with growing membership each year. The school also provides parent workshops on topics including our common core curriculum, using assessment data, and how to support academic growth at home. All workshops are presented in English and Spanish; parent volunteers are recruited to translate into other languages as needed. On Tuesdays, our teachers have allotted time to contact the parents and inform them about their children's progress. In addition, we have open houses in which the parents are welcome to meet with the teachers. This open houses are every month. The teachers, the secretary and the ENL coordinator keep records of the sign in sheets and agendas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ELL parents are extremly involve in our school community through various activities. They participate in our school wide events, which are at least once a month, as well as in the classroom activities such as class trips, and end of unit celebrations. This celebrations tend to be be once a month. We also have celebrations for Mothers' Day and Fathers' Day. Our Parent Coordinator assists in informing our parent community of our activities. She also provide workshops for the parents every other week. Translation services are provided as needed. Our parents also participate of adult classes provided for ENL and technology in the school. These classes take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays during the Spring. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Karen Bailey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Adam Claytom Powell Jr School DBN: 06M153 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Karen Bailey Title Principal Sol Idalia Flores Assistant Principal Stephanie Pratt Parent Coordinator Evelyn Mbame ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Courtney Donovan Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Angela Torres Coach Coach Yira Ramirez School Counselor Manuel Ramirez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M153 School Name: Adam Clayton Powell Jr Superintendent: Manuel Ramirez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 153 assess written translations and oral interpretation needs in a variety of ways. The first data we receive is on the Home Language Identification Survey in "Part 3 Parent Information." Parents inform us of the language in which they would like to receive written information as well as in what language they would like to communicate orally with the staff. After the form is filled out, our parent coordinator touches base with the parents again to ensure that they are receiving information and communicating with the staff in a language they understand. Lastly, because the large majority of our ELL parents speak Spanish, we have a Spanish - speaking school safety officer and a Spanish - speaking office staff so that when these parents enter the building or office, they will be sure to find someone with whom they can communicate in their native language. All notices sent home from the school are always in English and Spanish since these languages are overwhelmingly the linguistic needs of our parents. We do also send home some information in Arabic. For Parent Teacher Conferences, we position staff members throughout the school building to translate in Spanish, Sonike, French, 2  Creole, and German. These staff members are also available throughout the school year for translation and interpretation. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Spanish, Sonike, and Arabic. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. welcome letters newsletters calendars parent-teacher conference information monthly school wide events after school programs information 3  curriculum nights information meet and greet information New York State tests information 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? parent orientations curriculum nights parent - teacher conferences 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 4  At P.S. 153, we ensure that our parents receive the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in their native language. We also post the welcome sign which addresses different languages in the admission's office. Our school safety plan addresses procedures that will allow parents in need of language access services to reach the administrative office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will utilize the parent surveys as well as surveys conducted through out the school year to collect data. 5 
