 06M211 School Name: INWOOD EARLY COLLEGE FOR HEALTH AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES (P-TECH) SAMONA TAIT Principal:     Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 06M211 212-567-1825 Fax: Stait2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Inwood Early College 310600011211 9-12 650 Academy Street 212-567-1394 Phone Number: Dr. SJ Tait School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dr. SJ Tait Dr. John Rahl SusanaRamos Dr. SJ Tait Gloria Caban Teyanna Terry FrankelyGarcia N/A Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue, New York, NY 10001 fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212 356 3574 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity FSC: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Office Address: aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5618 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. SJ Tait Dr. John Rahl Mrs. SusanaRamos Mr. LudwigVasquez Ms. Gloria Caban Ms. Teyanna Terry Mr. FrankelyGarcia Mrs. Patricia Terrero Ms. Marilyn Dilone Mrs. Sonia Saldana Mr. BrianAndre *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/DC 37   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ms. Andrea Cabrera Member/DC 37 Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: Immersed in seamlessly integrated high school, college, and workplace learning experiences, our students will graduate as well rounded young professionals with advanced educational and career achievements in information technology, health information technology, and business prepared to further transform themselves, their communities, and the world . 0  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Vision At Inwood Early College, master faculty from the high school, Bronx Community College and seasoned professionals from Microsoft and NY Presbyterian provide students with a progressive college and career preparation course of study resulting in a CTE high school diploma, applied associate of science degree, and the launch of a career in information technology including hardware and software development, installation, networking, and support as well as business, health information technology, administration, and management. This vision is implemented through the integrated work of our partners, our parents, our students, and staff as we provide rigorous academics, dual enrollment in college courses beginning as early as tenth grade, and career readiness experiences ranging from mentoring and job shadowing to trained volunteerism and paid internships. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students with IEPs and those who are learning English as a new language not only receive mandated supports, but also benefit from the targeted support of an assigned assistant principal who ensures the coordination and alignment of services. Currently there are 95 students with identified special needs served primarily by integrated co-teaching programs. There are also 72 students who are still developing academic speaking, listening, reading and writing skills because English is not their first language. Our ENL students' needs are met primarily in the context of push in, embedded ESL services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In order to support students in achieving their goals, we provide rigorous instruction through a comprehensive project based curriculum and developmentally supportive instructional program. Teachers align their daily instruction by ensuring that students are engage in the following SMART activities: S parking our critical thinking, systematic questioning, and creative problem solving skill development; M otivating our sense of enthusiasm, curiosity, and passion for learning and achievement; A chieving our collective advancement as users and creators of knowledge, information, and technology; R efining our vision of our best selves and best work by reflecting on our mistakes and successes; and T ransforming our minds and our lives by supporting one another, serving others, and rising to challenges. Each academic department sets goals and each faculty member of each department crafts his/her course syllabus such that students are able to set goals for themselves and progress toward their highest possible levels of achievement. Through department and grade level collaboration as well as through focused curricular planning and training with college faculty, our teachers work together to ensure academic rigor. Each teacher serves as an advisor as well, so that students have at least one adult who is both serving as an advocate and teaching students to advocate for themselves as they prepare for college and career. A critical element of college and career readiness is the experience of students intentionally developing their sense of self as individuals and as members of school based and external communities. Our students begin this developmental process of belonging to and maintaining a supportive community by learning about, practicing, and reflecting on their demonstration of core values and commitments. 1  Values The core cultural values that ground instruction, school activities, and the relationships among all members of the school community at Inwood Early College are excellence, integrity, courage , and commitment . ● Excellence : being, doing, and having the best that one can in terms of achievement and personal growth endeavors. Each member of the school community is expected to use established standards to subsequently set his/her own bar for achievement and to exercise nimbleness in enacting effective effort toward continuous growth. ● Integrity : grounding one’s conduct in personal standards, and a sense of responsibility, accountability, as well as pride in oneself as a member of our community and a representative of one’s family. Each member of the community conducts himself/herself with a sense of appropriate time, place, and manner in exercising voice and choice. ● Courage : finding the strength to act in the face of struggle. Each member of our community is encouraged to purposefully stretch himself/herself, to take on challenges, to compete in order to win and to grow, to acknowledge failures and to celebrate growth that results from overcoming. ● Commitment : demonstrating persistence in seeing tasks, challenges, and opportunities through to their most valuable conclusion. Each member of our community develops grit through decision-making, dedication to finishing what s/he starts, and taking accountability for outcomes and consequences. Commitments Our Legacy Class identified seven (7) characteristics for which they want to be developed and held accountable as well as to set as standards of conduct for all classes to follow in their footsteps: Respect. Honesty. Fairness. Creativity. Responsibility. Professionalism. Leadership. As we assess our needs and plan our schoolwide improvement work going forward, we utilize academic performance data (standardized test data, teacher ), qualitative data including student writing, student course performance, as well as student and parent survey and anecdotal data. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M211 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 376 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 2 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 91.2% % Reduced Lunch 14.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 80.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.25 0% 33% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 29 28 3 13 92.0% 4.5% 22.9% 15.2% 1.6% 1.6% 2 7% 2.8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our needs assessment began with a review of college course requirements that our students must meet as they work toward earning their Associates Degree in Information Technology- CyberSecurity and Networking or in Liberal Arts and Sciences: Biology as well as the knowledge base required for obtaining entry level positions with our partner organizations, NY Presbyterian Hospital and Microsoft. This initial review revealed that students must be knowledgeable and skilled in the application of concepts in Algebra and Statistics as well as advanced Sciences including Biology and Chemistry. We also reviewed available data in STARS and ATS regarding incoming students’ middle school achievement in mathematics. Finally, we reviewed students school year course performance. As a part of our monitoring process will we also review students’ summer assignments and initial attempts at CCLS aligned performance tasks at the beginning of the upcoming school year. We also reviewed student work and data for our Legacy Class in ELA - including January 2018 regents- as well as the available data in ELA and Math for our rising grade 10-12 and incoming grade 9 students. The Legacy Class (grade 12) data revealed a need to strengthen reading comprehension skills as well as to build on foundational writing skills. Data for the incoming grade 9 students-7th grade state assessments from June 2017 - suggests that more that 50% of incoming students perform well below standards in ELA and slightly less than 60% perform well below standards in Math. Our strengths in providing rigorous instruction include the implementation of a team teaching model which allows two math and two ELA teachers to provide instruction in targeted non-ICT classes. This staffing model builds on the assignment of special educators who co-teach the ELA classes along with an ENL teacher, speech teacher, and designated paraprofessionals. Similarly, we assign special educators and designated paraprofessionals to co-teach Math in order to provide integrated team teaching support for students with mandates as well as for students at-risk of failure. Our needs in this area center largely in supporting teachers and paraprofessionals in providing consistently high impact, standards based instruction with specific focus on the development of effective assessments. Our student needs center on basic numeracy and algebraic concepts as a foundation of math learning. In ELA, student needs center on vocabulary acquisition, stamina to tackle extended texts, comprehension of complex texts, and writing extended, coherent, analytical compositions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 4  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor across classrooms will improve, as evidenced by an increase of 3% in the average number of students demonstrating college course dual enrollment eligibility 30% to 33%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers of Mathematics and a special education teacher will offer 2-4 periods per week additional instructional and tutorial support. This support will take the form of a seminar period which will parallel students' regularly scheduled Math classes. The special education teachers will utilize Accelerated Math, an online reading comprehension and vocabulary development program as well as iTouch, a computer based Mathematics skills program. The ENL teachers will utilize language appropriate supplemental materials during 2 periods per week and on Saturdays. Paraprofessionals trained in Great Leaps will provide targeted support in basic numeracy and literacy skills . Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students who are under-performing on unit assessments will be targeted for 2 day per week support. Students who receive mandated SETSS and those who are performing in the bottom third of the ICT class will be targeted for computer based program support. Supports begin at the end of the opening intensive (Oct. 1 2018) and take place in 3-week cycles through the marking period (Nov. 2018). Students may rotate out of service after they have performed well on an interim assessment. The special education teacher also offers the computer based supports on an ongoing basis. The mathematics teachers and the special education teacher implement the explicit instructional strategies and question generation techniques such as QFT in Math. The ENL teachers implement academic language development strategies and computer assisted technologies in order to support vocabulary development, reading and writing (sentence and paragraph structure to support writing in Math). The AP of support services and college/career coordinator oversee the support program and the AP Special Services oversees the Saturday program and the paraprofessional intervention program. 6  Teachers of Mathematics and ELA will offer extended day support which includes tutoring at the end of the school day 2 days per week. Extended day supports begin at the end of the opening intensive (Oct. 1, 2018) and continue through the end of the semester. (Jan. 31, 2019) Students may rotate out of service based on consultation with their advisor upon review of grades in Skedula. Students who are under-performing on unit assessments will be targeted for extended day support. Students who are not meeting standards regarding homework completion and class participation will also be targeted for extended support. Students whose advisors support their guided choice to participate in extended day will also be targeted. Students who are performing below standard in Math classes will be targeted for the use of supplemental materials in class as well as in specific regents prep settings. The mathematics teachers and the special education teacher implement course specific tutoring including self regulation and problem solving strategies in Math. The director of support services and college/career coordinator oversee the extended day program. 7  In class supports will occur during small group instruction and 1:1 conferences while regents prep will occur on Saturdays. Math teachers will utilize supplemental materials in class and during Saturday regents prep. The assistant principal will supervise regents prep. Teachers of Mathematics will acquire and implement supplemental materials to support achievement of Math goals including technology based curriculum and assessment resources: Castle Learning, STAR and Accelerated Reader/Math. The assistant principal of support services, guidance counselor, and the college/career advisor will offer extended day support which focuses on study skills at the end of the school day 2 days per week. Students whose foundational math skills are strong but who under perform on tests and quizzes will be targeted. Extended day supports begin at the end of the opening intensive (Oct. 1, 2018) and continue through the end of the semester. (Jan. 31, 2019). The assistant principal oversees the extended day program activities provided by the director of support services, guidance counselor and the college/career advisor. 8  The teachers of mathematics will receive professional development support from, co-plan units of study with, and co-teach targeted lessons with professors of mathematics from CUNY- Bronx Community College. The assistant principal is lead on professional development and the principal oversees the co-teaching program The professional development with college professors begin in October 2018 and run in cycles with co-teaching opportunities through May 2019. Students whose performance is below 75 at the end of the 2 nd marking period will be targeted. Students in the ICT class will also be targeted for lessons co-taught by the college professor(s). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will make more extensive use of Skedula/Pupilpath (learning management system) and the Remind app (communication system) so that parents can see critical curricular and assessment information on their cellular phones, or through the website. Building on information shared on Curriculum Night in September we will also provide curricular workshops for parents on alternate months throughout the year to coincide with unit plan implementation by teachers. Key personnel engaged in this work will include the parent liaison, college and career coordinator, academic department chairs, and grade level administrators. As we make our grading policy more transparent and build parent and student understanding of outcome based instruction and assessment, we will deepen our shared definition of rigorous instruction. Outcomes based instruction and assessment builds a coherent structure of specific learning outcomes based on the standards from the academic disciplines and industries that frame our school program. By focusing on learning outcomes, we also solicit the input of parents as they help to identify the personal, family, and community oriented development outcomes toward which our work is also driven. With the parent coordinator working with the office of college and career services and academic leadership team of department chairs and administrators, parent engagement will also be deepened as students are trained to lead conferences in which outcomes and the related work products are reviewed as well as to turnkey use of the related technologies embedded in the learning management and communications systems. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  In addition to the human resources as represented by the 4 teachers of mathematics, 4 teachers of ELA, 7 special education teachers, 8 paraprofessionals and 3 ENL teachers, additional resources include the director of support services, guidance counselor, college/career advisor and college faculty. Instructional resources include the Microsoft Surface devices, Lenovo laptops, software licenses for STAR, Accelerated Reader and iTouch. The time for PIVOT and extended day are built into student schedules. Further, teacher per session is used to ensure that faculty office hours are provided so that students may receive additional supports in order to reach rigorous academic standards. CUNY central and Bronx Community College provide in kind support of release time for the college faculty members who will work with the high school teachers. Resources through grant funding also provide support of a CUNY ECI instructional coach. VATEA grant funds provide support for the instructional technology resources and professional development utilized by all teachers including the special education and ENL teachers. Collaboration with CUNY partners is also supported with teacher and supervisor per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded X In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor across classrooms will improve, as evidenced by an increase of 2% in the average number of students demonstrating college course dual enrollment eligibility from 30% to 33%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use practice regents exams to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our needs assessment began in March 2017 with a series of townhall meetings with each class and was followed by 2 surveys. One survey focused on students identifying their strengths and interests. The second survey focused on students assessing various elements of their school experience including the development of a positive, supportive school culture. We also conducted a series of focus groups facilitated by the CUNY Early College Initiative. In addition, we examined the results of the school Learning Environment survey which students completed in Spring 2018. Our needs are for strengthening a coherent set of structures and activities to support the development of relationships particularly as we add new staff and another grade of new student as well as graduate our founding Legacy class. In addition, our needs center on increasing students' feeling that they trust their teachers and peers which belies their sense of feeling both safe and intellectually challenged by their teachers and peers, again, especially as our school continues to grow. Our strengths include staff and student willingness to engage in the work of developing and maintaining positive school culture and our use of time in the school schedule to allow for relationship building. Our strengths also center on the student support services and alignment of pairs of administrators and student support team members (social worker and/or guidance counselor) to each grade group of students such that we are able to watch students closely throughout the day and across the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2018, outcomes to questions on our internal survey regarding students' sense of safety and support will improve will demonstrate an increase in positive student response rate of 5%. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers implement an advisory program that centers on identity development and establishment of supportive school culture including the students’ development of core commitments which align with schoolwide values. The advisory program begins with a three week intensive in September during which advisory groups meet daily. Students across all grades with a focus on cross-grade relationships in support of the new incoming class will be targeted. The advisory program begins with an intensive from 9.7 - 9.28.18. The weekly advisory program will run from 10.1.18 to 6.1.19. The AP of support services oversees the advisory program and all teachers implement the advisory program with support from the college/career advisor, guidance counselor, social workers and college liaison. The college/career advisor coordinates implementation of mentoring programs that build on the academic and personal behaviors underlying college and career readiness (persistence, engagement, work habits, organizational skills, communication/collaboration skills, self-regulation) through which college students serve as peer mentors and industry partners serve as career readiness mentors. Students across both grades as the Discovery and Odyssey classes will be targeted. Teachers implement in-person and electronic communication structures and protocols to facilitate students voicing concerns, sharing ideas, and seeking support. In-person structures include AM and PM Huddle during which advisors meet briefly twice per day with small groups of students. Electronic structures include school email and the social media platform, Yammer. Students across both grades as the Discovery and Odyssey classes will be targeted. The mentoring program will run from October 2018 – June 2019. The college/career advisor will oversee implementation of the mentoring program. The in-person communications structures are utilized from Sept 2018 – June 2019; and the electronic communications structures from October 2018 – June 2019. The director of support services oversees teacher implementation of AM and PM Huddle. The technology teacher oversees electronic communications strategies. Students implement leadership development activities including leading ceremonies, rituals, and celebrations as well as participating in restorative justice practices. Leadership development activities are implemented through student council and peer mediation to support other students who Students who self- identify and those identified by the advisors based on the Student Council programming will run from October 2018 – June 2019. Peer mediation The grade leaders coordinate student council programming. The director of support services oversees 2 fall short of expectations including the student identified commitments. Students implement issued based student led organizations such as anti-bullying, self advocacy, Gay Straight Student Alliance, and Peer Mediation strengths surveys will be targeted. programming will run from November 2018 – June 2019 Students will self identify and student support team members will target students for participation. Student led organizations will engage in training in during the opening intensive September 2018 and begin program implementation by October 15, 2018. peer mediation programming. Assistant Principal guidance/student support will oversee implementation of these programs and strategies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. This is a key finding in our quality review and we will work with our advisory structure to ensure that parents are aware of and engaged in the provision of supports to their students. Advisors will conduct bi-monthly phone/email-a-thons and provide monthly check ins via email or phone or in person so that parents are well informed. We will share program activity progress with families and the larger community through the use of our school website as well as through our REMIND phone app and school messenger system which tools also allow parents to receive updates regarding other critical student data including but not limited to attendance, timeliness, and course performance. 3  In addition to informing parents of student activities, we will use student presentations and workshops in order to educate parents as to the key elements of our supportive environment building efforts. Sharing the feedback and survey data with all parents is another critical aspect of deepening parent an community understanding of the efforts to build a more supportive environment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staffing resources at the school level include the director of student support services, guidance counselor, college/career advisor, as well as teacher time for preparing and serving as advisors. In addition, our industry partners at Microsoft and NY Presbyterian Hospital and our college partner at CUNY Bronx Community College provide in kind support through mentors. Provision of time for AM and PM huddles as well as extended advisory periods require schedule adjustments as needed. Additional resources from the school’s budget support engagement of the Opportunity Network and CARA to support advisory curriculum development as well as rites of passage and peer leadership program planning. Resources will be used to support teacher training as well as per session for before school, afterschool, and weekend programs including peer mediation, college peer and industry mentoring activities, and advisory celebrations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, outcomes to questions on our internal survey regarding students' sense of safety and support will improve will demonstrate an increase in positive student response rate of 2% from September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the relevant questions from our internal survey to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our needs assessment began with a skills mapping process was carried out from July -August 2016 and reviewed annually each summer or early Fall focused on the entry level IT positions for which our students need to be prepared with our industry partners, Microsoft and NY Presbyterian Hospital. The needs assessment process continued with a review of available student data (standardized test data including regents, PSAT, and SAT as well as qualitative data including writing samples) which revealed a need to build students’ foundational skills in reading, writing, and mathematics. We also review college course syllabi in August during summer professional development and the core skill deficiencies of first year college students as identified by our college partners, Guttman Community College and Bronx Community College. Based on the data available to date, we find significant correlation between skill gaps for students transitioning to high school and students transitioning to community college. Needs assessment continued with analysis of student achievement data at the College and review of revised course sequences. This review included analysis of the June 2018 student performance data from our students who dual-enrolled in college courses. We conclude the assessment process with a review of teacher performance data as well teacher survey data. Our priority needs in this area center on the need to build teacher trust and collegial capacity to provide practice based feedback. Peer support structures are in place, however, we need to ensure that teachers have the training and incentives to regularly engage with peers regarding their practices. Our strengths in establishing a professional learning community around collegial collaboration center on the interest and willingness of teachers to reach levels of mastery in their practice as well as around the depth of experience in supporting collegial learning among our teachers, college partners, and Microsoft. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, effective teacher collaboration in peer intervisitations will lead to strengthened teacher practice as evidenced by a 4% decrease in the number of Developing or Ineffective ratings in Domain 1 (Planning and Preparation) teachers receive, from 20% to 16%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will engage in a targeted inter-visitation program through which each teacher selects practices that they wish to perfect and each teacher visits a colleague and provides him/her with written feedback regarding the visited teacher’s improvement efforts. Teachers will engage in co planning, team teaching, and peer feedback with Bronx Community College faculty and staff from the CUNY Affinity team. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers as members of the founding team will be targeted. Inter-visitations begin in November 2018 and continue through May 2019. Teachers of English, Mathematics, and Science will be targeted based on the skills gaps analyses and mapping. Co-planning, team teaching and peer feedback loops will run from November 2018 – April 2019. The principal oversees the inter-visitation program and the teacher who chairs the PD committee co-facilitates visits with colleagues. The principal oversees the inter-institution collaboration. The college liaison and assistant principal instruction facilitate the collaboration. Teachers engage in a blended learning approach to professional learning opportunities that allow teachers not only to integrate technology into their own learning but also to make efficient use of casual (off site and off hours) learning opportunities. Two critical elements of the blended learning strategy include the Affinity Network’s Video Learning Program and Microsoft’s Educator Network including the Innovative Educator Program. Teachers of English, Mathematics, and Special Education will be targeted. Blended activities will run from January – June 2019. The chair of the PD committee and the technology teacher team lead will oversee blended learning activities. Cross curricular project based learning cycles in collaboration with college faculty and industry partners and presentations to elder panels including parents and community members. Teachers of English and Technology will be targeted. The project based learning cycle will run from December 2018 – April 2019. This includes turnkey training by teachers who The principal oversees the project based learning cycles which are facilitated by the college liaison and the college/career advisor. 6  Teachers in department participate in unit planning training in summer 2017 and Academic Integration Network planning support beginning in Sept. 2017 which builds on the school year 2016-17 sessions. Both DELS and the ICT Lab program begin in October 2018 and continue through June 2019. 7  Teachers across all departments will engage in externally supported professional learning with DELS (Developing Experiential Learning Symposium) in order to collaboratively develop curriculum and with the ICT Lab program in order to implement more effective co-teaching models. leadership roles will be targeted for DELS and Science and Math ICT teams of teachers will be targeted for the ICT Lab program. The assistant principal in charge of special services and the assistant principal instruction will oversee implementation of these strategies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. One main strategy for engaging parents in this aspect of our work together is to invite them to professional development that is led by high school faculty, the college professors, and our industry partners. This year students will join the PD sessions as well as participants and as co-facilitators. Their will be a menu of offerings and parents will be able to choose whether they will attend events with their children as excursions to our partners' locations or if they will attend the events at school so that they observe and join in the collaborative work. Parents also visit our classrooms at their convenience with no appointments necessary in addition to workshops, student facilitated conferences, and training as a part of a yearlong PA series. Further, parents are a part of IEP and ENL student planning activities aligned with marking periods through which instructional strategies that best meet student needs are identified. In addition, weekly Tuesday engagement activities (phone conferences, face time, and in person) are used such that parents become familiar with teacher collaborative approaches and strategies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In addition to the human resources reflected by school faculty and staff, release time as in kind support will be needed from Bronx Community College, NY Presbyterian, and Microsoft for staff who will serve as collaborators , mentors, and elder panelists. Staff development resources will also be needed from the affinity group and OPSR in addition to the Microsoft Educator Network training resources. Per session hours will include afterschool monthly planning sessions from November 2017 -March 2018. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 8  By February 2019, effective teacher collaboration in peer intervisitations will lead to strengthened teacher practice as evidenced by a 2% decrease in the number of teachers whose ratings in Domain 1 are Developing or Ineffective. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the MOTP score tracker and Advance dashboard to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our needs assessment began with teachers’ self -assessment reflecting on their past supervisory ratings and their strengths and areas of growth given the 8 Danielson focus areas in Advance. We also examined student course passing data at the end of semester 1 and compared those to the midpoint of semester 2. The principal also completed a self assessment and utilized feedback from her CUNY ECI coach to identify strengths and areas of growth. The principal also conducted reflective analysis of the PPO feedback received in November 2017 and April 2018 as well as last year's quality review feedback. Our school's strengths in this area center on the distributive nature of leadership at our school, the reflective approaches to leadership practices, and the alignment with research based best practices. Our school's needs center on translation from implementation of best practices to impact of leadership practices such that there is greater consistency of monitoring and connection to teachers' daily work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leader will build teachers' capacity to use differentiated questioning and discussion techniques, as evidenced by a 5% increase of teachers performance in Danielson's framework for Teaching, component 3B (Questioning and Discussion Techniques) being rated Effective from 43% to 48%. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  School leader will review unit and lesson plans and engage in participatory observations through which she will model effective instructional practices and provide in the moment coaching to teachers. School leader will engage in coaching sessions targeting the provision of impactful feedback through the supervisory tools in Advance. Teachers will be given prior notice so that they anticipate having the informal observation and feedback cycle observed by a 3 rd party; such cycles will not count as an MOTP. School leaders will engage in professional learning and implement protocols for providing teacher feedback based on review of student work with a special focus work produced by students requiring differentiation (including not only students with IEPs and ENLs, but also students who are at-risk and those over performing). The principal and assistant principals are the target of this strategy. School leader will engage in professional learning and implement planning protocols which include identification and prioritization of areas for growth based on participatory observation, coached observation feedback loops, and teacher inter-visitation. The principal and assistant principals are the target of this strategy. This strategy will be implemented from January –March 2019. 1 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers whose past ratings or initial self- assessment reflect a level lower than highly effective will be targeted. Teachers whose past ratings or initial self- assessment reflect a level lower than highly effective will be targeted. Participatory observations will occur from Oct. 2018- March 2019. Principal coaching will begin in August 2018 and continue through May 2019, encompassing teacher inter-visitation cycles and instructional rounds. This strategy will be implemented from October 2018– March 2019. The principal will implement participatory observations and all assistant principals review unit plans and discuss lessons plans once per month in cabinet meetings. The principal will oversee implementation of the coaching with support from the superintendent’s office and the Affinity Network leader. The principal will oversee implementation of the coaching with support from the superintendent’s office and the Affinity Network leader. The principal will oversee implementation of the PD planning protocols in collaboration with  the AP instruction and the chair of the PD committee. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide more leadership development opportunities for parents by attending conferences and workshops with them. We will also create more regular opportunities through a chat-n-chew series during each semester so that parents can share strategies with each other. Our parent liaison will take lead on this element of the work and collaborate with the student support team and grade level administrators. Regular presentations at PA meetings and SLT meetings will serve as a key tool for building parent understanding as well as garnering feedback from parents as to effectiveness of leadership practices on their students' experiences and achievement levels. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources to be leveraged in order to achieve this goal include strategy implementation support from the superintendent’s office through a talent coach and professional development support from the Affinity Network (CUNY ECI). In kind support will also be provided by Microsoft for leadership development program participation. Professional learning materials will also be purchased as the principal builds out the professional library for administrative and teacher leadership. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, schools leaders will build teachers' capacity to use differentiated questioning and discussion techniques, as evidenced by a 3% increase of teachers performance in Danielson's framework for Teaching, component 3B (Questioning and Discussion Techniques) from 43% to 46%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Advance MOTP score tracker and dashboard will be the instruments to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our needs assessment includes reflections shared by parents at parent association meetings as well as those shared by students through feedback on survey. We also examined the 2017-2018 DOE school environment survey data. Our strengths center on parents' sense of trust, openness of our school and classroom environment, and focus of the academic programs on college and career readiness, particularly regarding the relationship with our partners and their presence either on-site or in their locations. However, the strongest request by parents centered on expansion of extracurricular activities and an increase in parent involvement in non-academic programs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent engagement with our college and industry partners will lead to improved family and community ties as evidenced by a 25% increase in the average number of parents who participate in site based training or celebratory activities from 20 to 25. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The principal and key representatives of the schools founding partnerships with Bronx Community College, NY Presbyterian Hospital and Microsoft will continue to engage in planning and implementation of student, family, and community engagement activities through a formal Steering Committee structure. Teachers and parents will engage in training and other learning opportunities in the form of workshops and externships with industry and college partner organizations. The college liaison will coordinate implementation of a peer mentoring program with college students from Bronx Community College, which will dovetail with the established industry mentoring program. Parent leaders from the PA and members of the SLT will implement a series of celebratory events, occurring at flexible times and taking place at the school as well as at the partner organizations, to which parents will be invited. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Each founding partnership member organization will be targeted. The Steering Committee structure will be implemented from Oct. 2018-June 2019. Teachers who have not worked in other industries and parents who self-identify will be targeted. All students who meet standards as reflected in the student-identified commitments will be targeted. All parents will be targeted. The workshops and externships will run from December 2018-April 2019. The college student peer mentoring program will run from November 2018-June 2019 The celebratory events will occur from October 2018-June 2019. The principal in collaboration with the college liaison, college/career advisor, and CUNY Early College Initiative facilitator, will implement the Steering Committee structure and process. The principal in collaboration with the college liaison, college/career advisor, and CUNY Early College Initiative facilitator, will implement the externship process. The college liaison will oversee the mentoring program working in collaboration with the college/career advisor. The community associate will oversee the celebratory events under the principal’s supervision. 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. As noted above, Microsoft, NY Presbyterian, and Bronx Community College are our main partners and their work supports parents, teachers, and students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In addition to human resources represented by school staff and mentors from our partner organizations, supports for work place learning, such as Ethnographies of Work curriculum and training from CARA, will be needed. VTEA grant funding will be utilized to support the workplace learning curriculum implementation, staff training, and parent engagement. Per session dollars will be used to engage students and parents in national organizations such as SKillsUSA, to support expansion of afterschool activities, and to support teacher-parent collaboration in events, off campus excursions, and on-site program offerings co-facilitated by parents and members of the community. Supervisor per session will also be used to support evening and weekend activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parent engagement with our college and industry partners will lead to improved family and community ties as evidenced by a 10% increase in the average number of parents who participate in site based training or celebratory activities from 20 to 22. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use parent sign in sheets to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Course performance below 75; homework completion rate of 50% or below; and/or quiz average below 70 Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Extended time is embedded in the school day through seminar periods which meet 2-4 per week. Additionally, the assignment of an additional teacher to co-teach and push into English classes four times per week during extended, double period blocks. Co-teaching and push in services include parallel teaching, station teaching, pre-teaching of vocabulary, and use of graphic organizers. Extended Day tutoring is also used to provide intervention support for targeted students. These services provide skill focused support as well as organizational skill development and homework completion support. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Seminar is delivered in small group and one-to-one depending on student needs. Co-teaching and push in services are delivered in whole classes allowing for reduced student:teacher ratio. Extended Day services are delivered in small group and one-to-one depending on student needs. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Seminar is delivered during the school day. Co-teaching and push in services are delivered during the school day. Extended day services are delivered after school. 7 College & Career Readiness Program will take place on Saturdays at InwoodEarly College. Seminar is delivered during the school day. Co-teaching and push in services are delivered during the school day. Extended day services are delivered after school. During the Saturday College & Career Readiness Program the students will have the opportunity to work in small groups on college readiness skills with an advisor, teacher, and peers. Students will also be participate in workshops to help them gain the soft skills that are often required in the college setting. Seminar is delivered in small group and one-to-one depending on student needs. Co-teaching and push in services are delivered in whole classes allowing for reduced student:teacher ratio. Extended Day services are delivered in small group and one-to-one depending on student needs. College & Career Readiness Saturday Program will be geared towards English Language Learners that need additional support in their language acquisition skills to prepare them for the early entrance program offered at the high school level. Mathematics Course performance below 75; homework completion rate of 50% or below; and/or quiz average below 70 Extended time is embedded in the school day through seminar period which meets two - four times per week. Additionally, the assignment of an additional teacher to co-teach and push into Mathematics classes four times per week during extended, double period blocks. Co-teaching and push in services include parallel teaching, station teaching, pre-teaching of vocabulary, and use of graphic organizers. Extended Day tutoring is also used to provide intervention support for targeted students. These services provide skill focused support as 8  Science Course performance below 75; homework completion rate of 50% or below; and/or quiz average below 70 Social Studies Course performance below 75; homework completion rate of 50% or below; and/or quiz average below 70 well as organizational skill development and homework completion support. Extended time is embedded in the school day seminar period which meets two - four times per week. Additionally, the assignment of an additional teacher, the Special Education teacher and the Technology teacher, to co-teach and push into Physics classes. Co-teaching and push in services include parallel teaching, station teaching, pre-teaching of vocabulary, and use of graphic organizers. Extended Day tutoring is also used to provide intervention support for targeted students. These services provide skill focused support as well as organizational skill development and homework completion support. Extended time is embedded in the school day seminar period which meets two - four times per week. Additionally, the assignment of an additional teacher, the Special Education Seminar is delivered during the school day. Co-teaching and push in services are delivered during the school day. Extended day services are delivered after school. Seminar is delivered in small group and one-to-one depending on student needs. Co-teaching and push in services are delivered in whole classes allowing for reduced student:teacher ratio. Extended Day services are delivered in small group and one-to-one depending on student needs. Seminar is delivered in small group and one-to-one depending on student needs. Co-teaching and push in services are delivered in whole classes allowing for reduced Seminaris delivered during the school day. Co-teaching and push in services are delivered during the school day. Extended day services are 9  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students of concern are identified during weekly staff huddle and students may also self identify as needing at-risk support. student:teacher ratio. delivered after school. Extended Day services are delivered in small group and one-to-one depending on student needs. Extended time services are delivered in small groups. Extended Day services are delivered in small groups. At risk SETSS and counseling services are delivered in small group and on a one-to-one basis. Advisory support services are delivered in small groups. Extended time services are delivered during the school day. Extended Day services are delivered after school. At risk SETSS and counseling services are delivered during the school day. Advisory support services are delivered before school and during the school day. teacher and the Technology teacher, to co-teach and push into Physics classes. Co-teaching and push in services include parallel teaching, station teaching, pre-teaching of vocabulary, and use of graphic organizers. Extended Day tutoring is also used to provide intervention support for targeted students. These services provide skill focused support as well as organizational skill development and homework completion support. Extended time is embedded in the school day through seminar period which meets two times per week for gender-based at risk counseling groups. Extended Day is also used to provide intervention support for targeted students. The social worker and college/career advisor provide skill focused support as well as organizational skill development and homework completion support. At risk SETSS and counseling services supplement mandated services 0  through individual and small group twice weekly sessions with the special education teacher and/or the social worker. Advisory support with twice daily mini conferences through AM and PM huddle provide students with social-emotional development support. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 29 students in temporary housing including shelters, other temporary living situations, and those who are doubled up. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide counseling support services for students and parents so that they are aware of community based resources. We also provide book bags, basic school supplies, and school uniforms for students in need. We also ensure that all students are able to participate in all academic excursions and filed trips regardless of the families ability to pay. Finally, we provide metrocards to the parents in need so that they may attend conferences, visit classes, and participate in trainings and celebratory activities. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment strategies included postings on the NYC DOE’s New teacher Finder, Open Market and other human resource portals. In addition, recruitment was conducted using external employment sites, local university career services at CUNY, SUNY, NYU, Columbia, Fordham, and Cornell, and alternative teacher preparation programs including Teach for America, Math for America, NYC Teaching Fellows, and Relay. Our recruitment strategy also included use of the 9-14 P Tech network, the CUNY Early College Initiative network, and industry partnerships. The hiring committee took lead role as well in expanding our faculty and, of course, only interviewed and conducted demonstration lessons with candidates meeting the basic HQ requirements. Staff assignments are made based in part on teacher preference and, moreover, on quality of work in license area, student performance, and staff interest in revising course content and strategies to meet students' needs. As we examine student needs and prepare the academic program for the year, we confer with department heads and specific staff in order to make the best possible match between staff and the teaching assignments. Maximizing staff opportunities to facilitate team work and to assume leadership roles is key to our distributed leadership approach which we use ot train and retain our growing teacher leaders.. Teachers and support staff attend off site professional development activities which they self select and which are recommended by the principal. These activities include support for the special education teacher in effective planning and co-teaching strategies, for the math teachers in algebra content and instructional strategies, for the technology teacher in embedding career development instruction, for the social worker in compliance and student support services, and the for ESL teacher in compliance and instructional strategies. In addition to the weekly on site professional learning after school, teachers also engage in professional learning through monthly department meetings with the principal and bi-weekly peer inter visitation. While we do not yet have any staff serving in formal coaching capacities, our college liaison facilitates professional co-learning activities with college faculty from Bronx Community College through which college faculty come to the high school and high school faculty visit the college. Our department chairs also serve as coaches-in-training and participate in the CUNY ECI instructional leadership support. The college/career advisor also facilitates the professional learning support for teachers with staff from NY Presbyterian Hospital and Microsoft which includes an externship program through which teachers and parents will shadow and plan lessons with our industry partners. Finally, the CUNY Early College Initiative provides additional professional learning opportunities including on site, real 4  time coaching which targets our new teachers and teachers working with our lowest performing students on academic English and core literacy skill development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Time for teachers and staff to meet weekly is built into the school schedule with two periods of common planning per week for all teachers. This common planning time supplements the weekly afterschool professional learning time. Teachers review unit plans and student grades to gauge student progress on CCCS. We will utilize Rubicon Atlas to engage in more focused analysis of standards and assessments. In addition, the schools Professional Development team will utilize data from the first semester to refine the professional learning plan for the spring semester. Professional learning also includes the paraprofessionals who support our students with special needs. All paraprofessionals are members of the School Improvement Team and they meet weekly with their grade level teacher colleagues and monthly with the assistant principal in charge of special support services. We will continue to work with the NYC Writing Project as well as the Mastery Collaborative and the Curriculum revision Project in order to provide targeted professional development support for teachers in each department. The Writing Project consultant will work with teachers across all departments. The Mastery Collaborative work will center on the use of assessment and the development of a mastery or competency based assessment and grading system. This work will be piloted in the mathematics department and the teachers in the technology department will also participate. Finally, the Curriculum Revision Project will provide support for high school faculty to partner with college faculty in the disciplines of English and Math in order to support curriculum and instructional practice development. As we bring on teachers who are new to the profession, we will extend the support that they receive by enlisting the teacher development resources of the Affinity Network (CUNY ECI). Our liaison, who helped to recruit History teachers, is a former History teacher and will lead the new teacher support for us next year. Professional learning support for the principal is provided by the Leadership Academy as well as the superintendent’s office and the Affinity Network team (CUNY). The principal will also participate directly in the Mastery Collaborative and Writing Project professional development as those two supports provide the anchors for building an integrated professional learning community across the high school and the college. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The decision making process for teachers to select assessment measures began with a series of professional learning opportunities in which the entire team engaged during 2017-2018, building on our beginning years' experiences, which centered on assessment policy and practice. Through these professional learning opportunities, the team analyzed course passing/failure rates and trends, read relevant literature together, reviewed actual assessment tools being used, and conducted collegial inter-visitations in order to share feedback on assessment practices. While we revised our assessment and grading policies and identified 7 key assessment practices to be developed and deepened, we acknowledge that deeper work needs to be done so that we create assessment policies and practices which move away from a transactional process to one that is competency or mastery based. Therefore, we will continue this work through participation in the Mastery Collaborative, a citywide professional learning community dedicated to developing mastery or competency based assessment systems in middle and high schools. Mathematics and technology teachers self identified by expressing interest in piloting mastery based assessment and they will serve as our school based learning lab. The decision making process also involves department meetings and bi-weekly check in conferences with the principal allowing for discussion and review of assessment tools, outcomes, and student experiences of our assessment policies. Teachers also meet as a team, facilitated by a senior teacher, to discuss and make MOSL selections. Staff from the Affinity Network provide technical assistance and then discussion is held with the principal for feedback and to ensure that teacher decisions are aligned with the broader school vision for student success. Finally, teachers then identify elements of the assessment practices that they will focus on in intervisitations and which they want to serve as focal points of their informal (MOTP) observations. The professional development committee met over the summer to draft plan the professional learning strands with the principal. The team will use data from the opening school year instructional intensive, a three week program through which students’ foundational skill deficiencies are addressed, in order to revise and target the first cycle of PD strands in order to ensure that common instructional strategies and techniques to address critical skills are prioritized in PD. This process is repeated at the midpoint of the first semester, end of first semester, and midpoint of the second semester. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the 6  consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 258000 2970000 Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5E, 6 5A, 5C, 5D 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 7   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Inwood Early College for Health and Information Technologies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Inwood Early College will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 9  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 0  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Inwood Early College , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 1  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 3  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 4  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Enrollment in our school based College and Career Readiness Program will be based on student reading levels identified by the Star Reader assessment and results from the NYSESLAT. Eighty percent of our English Language Learners, scored below at least two levels below their current enrollment grade on the STAR Reading Assessment and Baseline Diagnostic used at the school level and are in need of additional support in their reading comprehension and writing skills. Moreover, based on the 8th grade ELA scores of incoming freshmen there is a need for focused and targeted support in English Language Arts and Math among this population. Using these scores students will be grouped into 2 sections, the first section will be comprised of our Middle Year ELLs and our Students with Interrupted Formal Education while the second section will be comprised of our Long-term ELLs and Special Education ELLs. Both groups will receive direct instruction in Literacy that is focused on writing for college readiness and numeracy related to college finance and individual budgeting. Given that at Inwood Early College students are offered the opportunity to be eligible to enroll in a college course during their sophomore year based on scores from course work in conjunction with performance on the English Language Arts Regents and a panel interview this program will aid them in preparing for those pre-requisites and success in the course(s). The goal of this initiative is to provide students with academic support needed to ensure their success in attaining eligibility for enrollment in the Early College course, their college application process and coursework. Students will range in grade levels from 9-12th grade. All students whose NYSESLAT scores ranged from Entering to Expanding will be enrolled in the program. Students will be scheduled for a 90 minute literacy block and a 90 minute numeracy block. To participate in the program students will be expected to attend 2 Saturdays a month from 9-12 starting on November 3, 2019 and will conclude in April 2019 for 12 sessions. There will be 6 teachers and 1 supervisor on staff. Nov. 3 & 17 Dec. 1 & 15 January 5 & 12 Feb. 2 & 9 March 2 & 16 April 6 & 13 Instruction will be provided in English with our ENL certified teachers Ms. Thornton, Mr. Woods and Mr. Burn providing literacy instruction focused on college readiness, and Mr. Pillischer and Ms. Tamayo providing numeracy. The instruction will be focused on providing students with the resources and skills needed to complete college applications, navigate advanced texts, and understand how to budget for their college experience. Students will have tangible portfolios to demonstrate progress and proficiency College and Career Competencies outlined in the schools Scope and Sequence. Tasks and activities will include short writing pieces, extended writing pieces, algebraic real world math projects, financial plan for college, an 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information application essay, and they will present a project to a panel as part of their application process. Students will have a mock interview event to begin preparing for their actual event at the midway point and will close the program by presenting their work and preparation for college through a powerpoint presentation to family, friends, and faculty. The program will use texts that are provided by the school. The students will also partner with volunteer mentors from Microsoft to help orient them to technology and begin practicing incorporating technology into their academic habits. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In an effort to provide teachers with adequate support for providing instruction to English Language Learners the teachers will receive six hours of professional development, 3 hours will be provided by C. Riccardi from the Early College Initiative at $250 for a workshop on craft and style for writing across content areas and the other 3 will be on-site from D. Grant, Instructional Supervisor on building vocabulary and best literacy practices to English Language Learners. The teachers that will be participating in the program will be scheduled to complete their professional development on the Saturdays when students are not present. The topics to be covered will be reading comprehension, writing fundamentals, writing development for extended writing, writing across the content areas, and writing to prepare for speaking engagements. The teachers that will be participating in this program are three ELA/ENL certified teachers - Ms. Thornton, Mr. Woods and Mr. Burn and two math teachers Mr. Pillischer and Ms. Tamayo. The students will also receive online support from their volunteer mentors at Microsoft to support their technology practices in their academic habits. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to help students adequately prepare for the college experience we recognize that their parents must partner with them in the initiative. Parents will be invited to 2 informational sessions, one on the college admissions process and another on the financial aid application process, both information sessions will have translation available in the parent's preferred language. The events will be 90 minutes each. The topics to be covered during the information sessions will be the importance of developing habits of mind, skills required for college success, the college search, and financing the college experience. Parents will be invited via school 8 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities messenger, fliers in the language option of their choice, and email. Parents that rsvp to the event will have the option of translation at the event for maximum access to information. These workshops will be facilitated by A. Cabrera, director of college and career services and Yuderka Valdez, parent coordinator. Parents will be notified and invited to participate via initial Orientations, ELL newsletters, school calendars, and phone call reminders from the parent coordinator all in the parent's preferred language choice and translation will be available at all events. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) -  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL - - - - - - Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. - - - - - - N/A 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 06 School Name Inwood Early College for Health & Inform Borough Manhattan School Number 211 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Samona J. Tait Coach C. Riccardi ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher W. Burn, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Noam Pillischer, Algebra Teacher/Subject Area Colleen Schwartz, Sp.Ed Related-Service Provider C. Terrero Superintendent Manuel Ramirez Assistant Principal Ms. Grant Coach School Counselor A. Cabrera Parent S. Moreno Parent Coordinator Y. Valdez Field Support Center Staff Member Christopher Tricario Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 380 0 Total number of ELLs 52 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.68%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? ELLs were evaluated using the Measures of Student Learning Baseline Performance Task, Periodic Assessment, as well as a school based assessment in their content courses. These documents allowed teachers to conduct an item anlysis outlining the strengths and areas of improvement for each English Language Learner. The data collected suggests that the Ells at Inwood Early College, IEC, are strong in speaking ane require significant support in reading comprehension and written expression. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers meet in clusters to review and discuss instructional shifts based on data procured from the various baseline assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 1  The success of the Ell program will be determined by the accumulation of credits, growth on Baseline Performance Task, and overall accumulation of credits for coursework. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Parent meetings, student - teacher conferences, and grade level meetings aid in the planning and preparation to monitor student progress in order to ensure that the data gathered is accurate and is informing academic planning for students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns reveal that the ELL's areas of strength are Listening and Speaking while their Reading and Writing skills need to be fortified. It should also be noted that our SIFE students vary in strengths and are not a homogenous group in regards to academic capabilities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our cluster meetings provide teacher teams with the opportunity to share data and discuss the implications for instruction. We also meet as departments periodically to review school wide data to ensure that the spiral of skills is appropriate and fair, as well as aligned to the overall school curriculum. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Inwood Early College offers all ELLs stand-alone heterogeneous grade level based ESL instruction. Students enrolled in this course travel together as a cohort and receive language support and literacy scaffolds in all their content area courses. Their English Langauge Arts course is taught by an English Language Arts and English as Second Language teacher. All students are also enrolled in a PIVOT, tutorial period, Advisory group, and College Seminar to provide additional support. Our ELL Coordinator collaborates with our Director of Student Support Services to highlight students’ proficiency levels and properly program them for stand-alone ESL classes to meet the mandated number of instructional minutes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2  All Beginner level ELLs are programmed for three, forty-five minute, stand-alone ESL classes that meet 5 times per week. All Intermediate level ELLs are programmed for two, forty-five minute, stand-alone ESL classes that meet 5 times per week. All advanced level ELLs are programmed for one, forty-five minute stand-alone ESL classes that meet 5 times per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content Area teachers use the SIOP Model to provide ESL Strategies within their content area they also consult with the literacy teacher once a week to discuss writing prompts and activities for students across content areas. Teachers use the workshop model, which consist of the mini-lesson followed by independent practice and back to whole group share out. The teachers differentiate lessons and activities. They design assessments and scaffold to gauge and improve student learning. Uniform practices such as taking notes using the Cornell Note Taking Style and incorporating different levels of depth of knowledge questions is incorporated in content area lessons to make content comprehensible. Even though the language of instruction may be in English most of the time, lessons include vocabulary instruction and students are provided with reference materials in their native language upon request. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When students are initially enrolled in our school, our Spanish College and Career Readiness Advisor and ELL Coordinator administers the Spanish Lab to students. Based on their level students are enrolled in the appropriate ESL class and receive language acquisition instruction. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our teachers create differentiated lessons and activities for ELL subgroups.. Additionally, SIFE students, beginner level and new comers participate in the Accelerated Reader Program to increase their vocabulary, to lower their affective filter and to help them improve their grammar as well as their listening and speaking skills. b. Newcomer students receive personalized support from ENL teacher as well as a PIVOT period to ensure that they are learning the fundamentals in English while also participating in a grade level English Language Arts course with built in scaffolding and modified literature to aid them in their acquisition of English. The goal is to provide the student with the necessary resources to succeed in the general education in an effort for them to remain on track to graduation. c. Students receiving 4 to 6 years of service are one of the two target groups created by our ESL Department. We look closely at these students NYSESLAT testing patterns alongside their regents’ performance and classroom performance in developing action plans for these individual students. These action plans may involve participating in extended day school, afterschool tutoring and/or in class reading and writing conferences with a licensed ESL teacher. d. Long term ELL students are the second target group of the ESL Department. For this group again, we look closely at these students’ NYSESLAT testing patterns alongside their regents’ performance and classroom performance in developing action plans for these individual students,which are used to support classroom instruction. We invinte parents in for a family meeting to discuss the learning progress concerns and create specified goals for the student which are then revisited mid semester and at the close of the semester. e. As for our former ELLs, we develop individual action plans based on their regents’ performance and classroom performance, which are used to support classroom instruction. These students also receive additional support from their advisor to ensure their skills do not stagnate and to provide additional support in classroom learning if needed. 3  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The teachers of ELL-SWDs choose materials that are appropriate to the instructional level of their students based on the results of the New York City Performace Task. Instruction is delivered using the workshop model and all lessons include vocabulary development, teacher differentiated lessons and all modular activities incorpate multiple modalities of learning based on the needs of students so that they can demonstrate their learning according to their strengths. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ESL teacher along with the general faculty and the Special Education Coordinator examines the IEPs of ELLs identified as having special needs in order to determine how students can achieve their IEP goals in their classrooms. The teachers differentiate their lessons according to the needs of these students. Furthermore, these students participate in the Accelerated Reader Program, Saturday School, extended school-day and/or after school regents prep. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Ells are organized in self contained classes with either an ESL teacher or as part of an collborative teaching course. The progrqm for instruction at IEC entails block scheduling with hetreogeneous grouping of students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Inwood Early College provided scaffolded support during humanities coursework and would like to extend this into the STEM coursework as well in an effort to strengthen student interest and provide more pathways to success. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs receive targeted instruction during PIVOT, a set of opportuntiies to improe academic achievement and to explore areas in need of improvement. Their PIVOT instructor prescribe, implement, visualize, observe, and test to assess both the acquisition of and transferability of skills and content knowledge. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs do receive technological assistance upon request. There are several programs offered by Microsoft that enable students 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students that require a language paraprofessional receive it in all content area courses. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Teachers meet daily to discuss learning outcomes and goals for students. If a teacher notices that a student requires additional services whether mandated or not they will plan for and try to provide the necessary service. If an intervention is needed that teachers cannot provide then they will seek support from the Director of Support Services. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs do receive technological assistance upon request. There are several programs offered by Microsoft that enable students 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 4  Students at Inwood Early College are expected to participated in a Summer Bridge program that provides them with the opportunity to strengthen skills acquired in middle school and begin to experiement with concepts and skills that will be introduced during their high school experience. This Bridge program also allows the staff/faculty at IEC to begin evaluating, assessing, and planning for the students by revealing their strengths and areas in need of improvement. Students that enter during the school year are offered project options to aid them in acquiring the credit they might have missed as well as extended day opportunities to strengthen and refine their skills and conceptual understandings. All students are expected to submit end of unit projects 6x a year to prove command of skills and concepts presented in their academic coursework. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs can opt to take Spanish or French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development will be conducted for classroom teachers as a two-part workshop once every other month during their professional development period on Mondays. They will take place from 3:15-4:35 pm. They will be based on the SIOP Model and "Making Content Comprehensible for English Learners," a book by Jana Echevarria, MaryEllen Vogt, and Debora Short . The topics to be covered will build on last year's SIOP workshop series and delve further into the SIOP components. These components include: Lesson Preparation, Building Background, Comprehensible Input, Strategies, Interaction, Practice/Application, Lesson Delivery, Indicators of Review/Assessment, and Issues of Reading Development and Special Education for English Learners. This year's series will emphasize revising teacher lesson plans by incorporating language objectives, further differentiating lessons by providing appropriate ELL accommodations (as well as how to differentiate amongst ELL proficiency levels) and ensuring all language modalities are met throughout a lesson. All teachers who teach English language learners will be invited to attend; although, content area teachers will be targeted. ESL teachers will also receive professional development relevant to their work with ELLs. The following is a list of PD sessions they will attend: Topic: Helping Students to Read Complex Text: Designing Close Reading Experiences (Middle-High School Session) Rationale: Introduction to the close reading experience for teachers of middle-high school and how to design close reading experiences alligned to CCLS and supporting student needs. Topic: Planning a Close Reading: Experience for ELLs Rationale: Understanding different levels of language acquisition/progressions as they relate to the four language domains and reinforce/make practices of close reading accessible to all levels/proficiencies of ELLs. Additionally, creation/presentation of social studies lesson plans that embed close reading practices tailored to ELLs' needs across language proficiencies/progressions. Topic: Helping Students to Read Complext Text: Designing Close Reding Experiences Rationale: Introduction to the close reading experience for teachers of elementary shool and how to design close reading 5  experiences alligned to CLLS and supporting student needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The IEC staff/faculty has received training from Ronda Bondi in regards to being culturally responsive while still engaging in academic instruction. The staff/faculty has also attended and will continue to attend professional development workshops throught the Opportunity Network which provides explicit guidance on topics, discussions, and activities geared at creatitng inclusive spaces that foster both professional and personal growth for youth. Each student is assigned an advisor for their first two years at IEC this faculty/staff member becomes a critical point person for that child serving as their guide, mentor, advocate, and cheerleader. Teachers are encouraged to attend, particiapte, and facilitate workshops that will enhance their learning and practice as pedagogues. Teachers often collaborate and attend workshops together then return and turn key knowledge gathered with their colleagues at IEC to ensure that instrutional practices are strengthened and supported. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to meet with the ENL teacher, Director of Student Support Services, and other staff or faculty that regularly iteraction with their student to discuss, plan, and revise strategies for the child's learning plan. Most often these meetings are faciliated by the staff at IEC at mid points in the Marking Period prior to summative assessment periods. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Association at IEC is very involved and seeks to ensure that all parents are advocated for. ELL parents are invited to participate just like all other parents. Parents often volunteer for school events, visit, host special events, and participate in school outings. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Given that Inwood Early College is a pathway to techonology school our academic program is very rigorous. Several students have enrolled and given their current identifications may have to follow an alternate pathway as they will require additional support in their content area work. However the academic intervention team at IEC is committed to the academic success of all students and therefore has created dual tracks so that students can ensure completion at their own pace. 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Samona Tait, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Samona Joe Tait Title Principal Danielle E. Grant Assistant Principal Y. Valdez W. Burn S. Moreno Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent C. Schwartz, SpEd Teacher/Subject Area N. Pillischer, Algebra Teacher/Subject Area C. Riccardi A. Cabrera Manuel Ramirez Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 06M211 School Name: Inwood Early College Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Danielle Grant AP YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All families complete questionnaires and the HLIS regarding the language learning preference for their child. Parents are invited to a curriculum night where they meet all the teachers and student advisors. They are introduced to the rigorous academic program offered at Inwood Early College, Academic support systems and interventions that are employed at IEC, and have an opportunity to discuss specific needs with staff and faculty. The Assistant Principal of Instruction, Ms. Grant and parent Coordinator work strategically to ensure that parents have the necessary documentation so that their child will receive all the required services in conjunction with other services needed to ensure their child's success. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 9  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Arabic Fulani Spanish English English English 10 90 .5 .5 Spanish English English English 10 90 .5 .5 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Rolling Basis Parent Coordinator Translates Inwood Early College provides parents with activity calendars, report cards, progress reports, emergency contact cards, cell phone policy, internet usage policy, medical forms, academic surveys, biannual school culture survey, extended day option forms, curriculum night invitations, parent teacher conference , testing calendars, lunch forms, and permission slips. ENL Newsletter Entitlement Letters Bi monthly October & April HIV Education Opt-Out October College & Career Advisor & LTI NYC DOE Intranet NYC DOE Intranet 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 0  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? October - May Parent Coordinator Typically parents visit our school for annual review of an Individualized Education Plan and/or English Language Learner Annual Planning Meeting for Family (Individual). Curriculum Night September & February LTI - Phone Services Parent Coordinator &, Staff Volunteers Parent Teacher Conferences November, March, May Parent Coordinator & Staff Volunteers Special Events Occasional Parent Coordinator & Staff Volunteers 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In case of emergency the parent coordinator and Ms. Grant, assistant principal immediately contact the parent to inform them of the event. In the case that the parent is unable to communicate the LTI over the phone translation unit is used to ensure that all the details of the incident are accurately conveyed to the parent. Moreover, to ensure that any lingering questions the parents have are answered. A member of the student support team then escorts the child or remains with the child until the parent can arrive. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development Training will occur for the individuals associated with providing language support and interpretation services. The LAC will provide this training. There will be a mid year training as well to refresh all individuals with policies and protocols. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) When visiting Inwood Early College parents will be offered documents in their preferred language. They will be informed that an on site interpreter will be provided for the meeting. They will be asked if they would prefer a 3 rd party from Translation and Interpretation Unit. Parents will be made aware of the academic goals and requirements for their students during the current semester. 1  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Inwood Early College provides surveys for parents once a semester. Parents are also involved in the Parent Association and School Leadership Team, which both meet monthly. These mechanisms allow parents to share their perceptions and concerns so that the school faculty and staff can modify systems and instruction to improve instructional practices and school culture. Parents are also reminded that Inwood Early College has an open door policy, parents are welcome to visit the school for a walk in appointment. 2 
