 03M247 School Name: M.S. M247 DUAL LANGUAGE MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: KRISTINA JELINEK   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Dual Language Middle School 03M247 School Number (DBN): 310300010247 6, 7, 8 100 West 77th Street, NY NY 10024 212.496.1050 Phone Number: 212-496-1087 Fax: Kristina Jelinek kjelinek@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kristina Jelinek Wendy Guardado CarolaGrundmann AnshuPrabha Karen Lopez N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 03 Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 West 93 rd Street, New York, NY 10025 Superintendent’s Office Address: IAltsch@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: 212-222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue; New York, NY 10001 YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kristina Jelinek Wendy Guardado CarolaGrundmann Karen Lopez Sasha Arias Anshu Prabha PalomaFerreyros *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MiscandyCorporan Angelica Salgado Jessica Badonsky MoisesArvelo Arlenys Rojas Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Guidance Counselor Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: The Dual Language Middle School is dedicated to the continual development of bilingual, bi-cultural students through a strong academic program in English and Spanish. The Dual Language Middle School fosters pride in student’s heritage as well as an appreciation for the cultures of others. We believe that developing linguistically and culturally diverse students leads to higher levels of language proficiency, achievement, and self-esteem.   Vision: The Dual Language Middle School ’s vision is to provide a place where bilingual, bi-cultural, urban students can study in an environment that recognizes and celebrates their cultural identities. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Dual Language Middle School is a welcoming, caring, and inclusive environment that provides a rich educational experience. Based on results from the School Survey, students enjoy learning, parents are happy to send their children to the school and staff are provided with opportunities to take on leadership roles to benefit the school as a learning community. The school’s fundamental principles of ‘Respect/Responsibility, Enthusiasm, Achievement, Citizenship, and Hard Work,’ or R.E.A.C.H., are an indication of the school’s very strong values and insistence upon high standards for academic success. These core values are embedded in daily classroom activities as well as school-wide celebrations. The school’s performance has been on an upward trend for the past five years, greatly assisted by the careful tracking and analysis of students’ progress, and thoughtful matching of programs to individual student needs. One of the most important strengths of Dual Language Middle School is the detailed information that is held about each student and the way in which data is used to plan and deliver high-quality instruction. Students are well-mannered, articulate, and have positive attitudes toward school. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Dual Language Middle School student population includes Students with Disabilities with a range of learning needs who can best be supported in co-taught classrooms. Additionally, approximately 24% of the students in our community have not yet demonstrated proficiency in the English Language as measured by the yearly NYSESLAT assessment. These students receive both dual language and ENL instruction to support their language proficiency and development across content areas. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2016-2017 and 2017-18 school years, the Dual Language Middle School community focused on building trust through: collaboration among teachers, a supportive environment, and rigorous instruction. These elements were strengthened through purposeful collaborative planning and peer-feedback structures, implementation of inquiry-based work and Professional Learning Communities, and comprehensive Advisory structures for all students and families to capitalize upon the supportive environment in place. For the 2018-2019 school year, these areas will continue to be those of focus, with special attention given to strengthening rigorous instruction for all students through continued collaboration and focused professional development rooted in identifying areas for growth in instructional practice aligned to student learning outcomes (content and skills). Specifically, the school will identify purposeful strategies for student engagement and learning as well as culturally relevant pedagogical moves. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M247 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 198 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 9 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 18 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 88.9% % Reduced Lunch 24.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 97.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.11 5% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 32 32 95.4% 3.5% 25.8% 1.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0 30% 3.4 41.1% 56% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At the beginning of each school year, staff and administrators at Dual Language Middle School engage in comprehensive data analyses. Analyses of the ELA data indicate that at the beginning of each school year, approximately 15% of students have achieved a proficiency rating of 1 on the NYS ELA exam and 24% of students have achieved a proficiency level of 1 on the NYS Math exam during the previous school year. English as a New Language Learners, General Education Students, and Special Education Students are all represented in the category of students achieving a level 1 proficiency rating; as a result, school leaders and staff members recognize the importance of strengthening curriculum and instruction in order to leverage improved student outcomes in the area of English Language Arts and Mathematics. During fall 2017, a school-wide reading assessment was conducted using the Village Academies reading assessment in order to identify students’ independent reading levels to strengthen data streams used to differentiate instruction during Book Club and other instructional periods. At this time, school leadership determined that more than 50% of students enrolled at Dual Language Middle School were reading below grade-level. In anticipation of collecting new data in Fall 2018, the school will enhance its Book Club model to offer 3 periods a week of WIN (What I Need) in order to provide targeted ELA and math intervention, as well as Algebra 1, Computer Science and/or Art History for those students who have surpassed grade-level expectations in ELA and math. Based on the number of students earning a Level 1 on the NYS Math Exam in Spring 2018, the number of math intervention groups will grow from 1 group during the 2017-2018 year to 4 groups during the 2018-2019 year. Additionally, these data points provide an impetus to further align curriculum with students’ needs, specifically enhancing students' conceptual understanding, as identified through comprehensive data analyses and individual student mastery tracking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Dual Language Middle School will reduce the number of students scoring a Level 1 on the New York State Math exam by 50%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Four differentiated mathematics groups will meet during WIN (What I Need) three periods per week, utilizing research-based instructional resources to target student strengths and resources. All students 9/2018- All instructional staff 6/2019 Math and science teachers will refine instructional strategies and practices to strengthen students' critical thinking by elevating rigor of task to require increased justification and reasoning in addition to mathematical precision. All students 9/2018- 6/2019 Math teachers, ENL teachers, teachers of Special Education, Science teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be facilitated by the Parent Coordinator, guidance counselor and teachers in order to support the school-home connection around Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core. Weekly progress reports will be distributed and available online so that parents are informed about their children's progress in a timely manner. Staff will provide training so that parents are aware of how to read the progress reports and support their children accordingly. Specifically, this information will be shared during Back to School Night, Parent Welcome Breakfasts and during student-led conferences. Additionally, teachers will lead academic share events throughout the year, through which parents and families will explore curriculum and student work alongside members of the school community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Scheduling: a. Implementation of differentiated mathematics curriculum aligned with New York State Math examination and Common Core State Standards, specifically focusing upon increasing students' exposure to foundational skills and multi-step problems; and b. Supplemental mathematics support provided during the school day as small-group instruction (“What I Need") and additional push-in supports provided by ESL and Special Education Teachers. 2. Staffing/Training: 3  c. Professional learning communities will be established to research and implement strategies geared towards increasing student mathematics levels. d. Four teachers will provide small group mathematics instruction three times per week targeting the needs of all students. At the the same time, additional teachers will provided targeted literacy support to both struggling students. Four teachers will provide advanced Algebra 1, Art History and Computer Science programming during the instructional periods. e. Two teachers will provide targeted instruction focusing upon teaching English as a New Language to students performing in the lowest quartile as measured by either the NYSESLAT or ITEL assessment (depending upon date of enrollment) as a part of the small group intervention program, with a focus on both literacy and mathematics. f. Teachers will provide small group after-school instruction to support targeted students, specifically those with disabilities and ENL learners. 3. Budget: g. Teacher salaries will be funded using Tax Levy and Title I SWP funds h. Title III funds will be used to purchase curricular resources to support student literacy and fund small-group afterschool programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Midpoint benchmark (February): By February 2019, students performing below or far below standards will demonstrate an 8% increase in scores on a mock NYS mathematics exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Mock Math Exam administered in September and February, leading to increased student performance on the New York State Math exams (results available August 2019). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based upon feedback provided during announced visits conducted by District 3 Superintendent Ilene Altschul and PLF Cynthia Dickman, as well as internal needs assessments of content, curriculum, and student progress, one of the greatest leverage points for Dual Language Middle School is the alignment of our Advisory and content area curricula with the Academic and Personal behaviors, through enhanced discussion and strategies that elevate rigor and student engagement of critical thinking across content areas to promote student self-advocacy and ownership of learning. This opportunity to strengthen this area is evidenced by the NYC 2017-2018 School Quality Guide in which Dual Language Middle School averaged 60% in Supportive Environment on student-based inventory items. Though this demonstrates growth from the 58% average in 2016 - 2017, the school can continue to grow in this area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Dual Language Middle School will increase its student-generated Supportive Environment survey results from 60% positive to 75% positive as indicated on the NYC School Quality Guide. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In all content areas, teachers will identify strategies by which they can support students’ development and practice of academic and personal behaviors including persistence, engagement, work habits/organizational skills, communication/collaboration skills, and self-regulation within unit plans through: extension activities; relevant real-world application, and/or targeted, mastery-focused differentiation. Departments will conduct comprehensive needs assessments focusing upon teacher practice and student learning to identify one key strategy specific to either 3b: Using questioning and discussion techniques or 3c: Engaging Students in Learning to enhance instructional practice and elevate rigorous student learning (September 2018). Advisory curriculum will be analyzed and updated during summer planning sessions and bi-weekly planning meetings. The changes will be assessed through student, staff and family surveys two times per year. DLMS will revise its REACH program and Ladder of Consequences to ensure fairness, equity and clarity for students, staff and families. Professional development cycles (whole-staff, department, and individual teachers) will focus upon strategies that will strengthen student engagement in critical thinking using differentiated instructional supports and implementation of tasks aligned with the demands of the Academic and Personal Behaviors and associated resources. DLMS will administer a student, family and staff survey to assess the school's response to disruptive behavior, including perceptions of disruptive behavior as a learning opportunity for students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students 9/2018- 6/2019 All instructional and support staff All students and parents 9/2018- 6/2019 All instructional and support staff All students and staff 7/2018- 6/2019 Advisory Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Principal All students and staff 9/2018- 6/2019 All instructional and support staff All students and staff 9/2018- 6/2019 All instructional and support staff Students, staff, families 2/2019 Principal, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  Advisors will conduct 1:1 opening meetings with families by the end of September 2018 , as well as 2 student-led academic conferences throughout the school year (December 2018 and March 2019). Advisors will maintain consistent contact with parents to ensure ongoing communication about students' academic, social/emotional, and behavioral progress. All teachers, the guidance counselor, and parent coordinator will be responsible for coordinating these efforts. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling: a. All content area departments will meet two times per week at minimum to engage in discussions about instructional dilemmas/problems of practice; b. Three times per year, at minimum, teachers will participate in peer observations and cycles of lesson study focusing upon the implementation of a strategy aligned with either competency 3b or 3c; and c. Professional development sessions will be differentiated based upon teacher self-assessment, peer, and supervisory feedback. d. A teacher will serve as Advisory Coordinator to organize efforts around the revised Advisory curriculum, with support from the Guidance Counselor, Principal, and colleagues. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, students, staff and families will be surveyed to in response to school progress in teaching the Academic and Personal Behaviors and the school's overall approach to behavior management and support, reporting at least 70% positive results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-administered survey, leading to improved results on the NYC School Survey in the School Quality Guide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based upon a comprehensive needs assessment conducted within department teams, as well as feedback provided during supervisory visits conducted by Superintendent Ilene Altschul and Principal Leadership Facilitator Cynthia Dickman, Dual Language Middle School is well-positioned to capitalize upon collaborative planning strategies and structures in order to further align and enrich content are curriculum across content areas and grade levels to enhance. Content-area curricula are aligned with standards and reflect student needs based upon data, however, feedback from supervisory visits noted that not all students were consistently engaged in critical thinking in all content areas. Thus, there is room to develop teacher pedagogy with regards to Danielson's 3c (2018 Average: 3.14) and 3d (2018 Average: 2.99) and student independence in line with the Academic and Personal Behaviors. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, one hundred-percent of DLMS teachers will participate in strategic intervisitation with a focus on elevating levels of rigor and critical thinking across content areas as evidenced by classroom instruction, instructional plans, and student work products, resulting in improved teacher practice of .2 with respect to Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning and Component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). By June 2019, all teachers will participate in a minimum of two peer observations during which they will craft feedback aligned with Danielson’s Framework and share the feedback with observed teachers to leverage improved instructional practice as identified during the needs assessment conducted in September 2018. During the 2018-2019 school year all teachers will participate in school-based PLC or inquiry groups focusing upon a topic selected by the teachers that is aligned with the school’s instructional vision and focusing upon enhancing practice specific to Domain 3c to ensure alignment between learning objectives, activities and opportunities for student intellectual engagement. Departments will engage in cycles of collaboration and feedback focusing upon FfT competencies selected by the department based upon student learning and teacher practice needs determined in partnership with department members and school leadership. Departments will conduct a comprehensive needs assessment in September 2018 (and, as necessary, February 2019) during which they will identify one problem of practice (rooted in student data and reflected in teacher practice data) upon which to focus. Following department meetings will focus upon building those practices in planning and instruction. Teachers will review student work products to determine areas of success and areas in which further development is necessary. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers 9/2018- All instructional staff 6/2019 All teachers 9/2018- All instructional staff 6/2019 All teachers 9/2018- All instructional staff 6/2019 All teachers 9/2018- All instructional staff 6/2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided with ongoing updates regarding students' academic progress in alignment with teachers' co-teaching and co-planning practices through weekly progress reports, Academic Alerts (at least once per trimester) and invitations to school-wide events such as Science Fair (February 2019), the Arts Showcase (May 2019) and related academic shares. 9  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. All teachers will be provided monthly, on-site professional development focusing upon examination, analyses, and implementation of Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching 2. Teachers will set year-long goals rooted in Danielson’s Framework for Teaching , which will be revisited once during the year and once at the end of the year to tailor individualized support to ensure teacher growth and strengthen teachers’ practice. 3. Teachers will be programmed to meet with department members to facilitate reflection, needs assessment, systems monitoring, review of student work, and collaborative learning. Meeting agendas, minutes, and resources will be shared using GoogleDrive. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February Benchmark: 75% of total formal and informal observations will have been conducted, with teachers earning Effective or Highly Effective ratings in components 3c and 3d in at least 75% of conducted and confirmed observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Increase in teacher pedagogical practice as measured by Advance observation data and student survey reports indicating the level to which students feel challenged to engage in critical thinking and inquiry across content areas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a comprehensive analysis of school data and survey item responses on the School Survey Measures, there is an opportunity for growth across the school in connecting programs and supports to the school's instructional vision. This is evidenced in teacher survey items connected to the principal's communication of a clear vision for the school (79% positive in 2017-18), the principal's clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development (72% in 2017-18), and clarity on how all programs offered are connected to the school's instructional vision (79% in 2017-18). Building on the strong school-wide culture and structures for teacher leadership, there is an opportunity for all leaders across the school to deepen, clarify, and communicate connections between programs and supports and the school's instructional vision. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers, students, and families will report clarity in instructional leadership, with a focus on clear channels and opportunities to consistently connect all school programs back to the school's instructional vision, evidenced by a 90% positive rating by teacher, family, and student items on the School Survey Measures. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Ongoing (weekly) individualized professional development using Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching to build teachers’ capacity to plan and deliver quality instruction. Teacher-driven needs assessment and goal-setting focusing upon strengthening teacher practice and, thus, student outcomes with priorities placed upon students' needs as identified by a review of state and local assessment data. Teacher-selected Professional Learning Community (PLC) topics, connected to the school's instructional vision, will be utilized (based upon surveys) to develop topics of study and teacher-selected PLC groups for the year. Additionally, teacher facilitators and participants engaged in the school's Collaborative Action Research Program team will explore an instructional problem of practice connected to the school's instructional vision and track progress across the year. One to two times per month, PLCs will meet during professional learning time to complete the inquiry project, including: reviewing resources, sharing resources, reviewing teacher work, reviewing student work, and tuning the action plan based upon progress toward the school's instructional vision and needs revealed by the quantitative and qualitative data streams. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 All teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 All instructional staff, school leaders All instructional staff, school leaders All teachers 9/2018- All instructional staff, school leaders 6/2019 All teachers 9/2018- All instructional staff, school leaders 6/2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided with ongoing updates regarding students' academic progress in alignment with teachers' co-teaching and co-planning practices as well as teacher inquiry projects through weekly progress reports, Academic Alerts (once per trimester) and invitations to school-wide events such as Science Fair (February 2019), Advisory celebrations, and related academic shares. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  1. All teachers will be provided monthly, on-site professional development focusing upon examination, analyses, and implementation of Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching based upon supervisor and peer-feedback rooted in student achievement data and instructional practice data. 2. One to two professional learning sessions per month will be devoted to teacher-facilitated PLC work, including identification of topics for exploration, research, planning, review of student work, review of teacher work/artifacts, and facilitating staff-wide professional development. 4. Department meetings, led by the Instructional Coach, each week will be devoted to evaluating needs and collaborative problem solving to enhance instructional practice based upon student and instructional practice data in alignment with the school-wide instructional focus. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In Feburary 2019, a school-administered survey will be distributed to students, staff and family members with questions related to effective school leadership receiving at least an 80% positive rating. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-administered survey, leading to improved results on the NYC School Survey in the School Quality Guide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In alignment with the Framework for Great schools, the Dual Language Middle School is well-positioned to strengthen the school community by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families and community-based organizations. All teachers work closely with a small group of students through the Advisory program; students are well-known, and regular communication takes place consistently between the school and families through an open-door school policy, close advisor-advisee relationships and the PupilPath grading program. Families and staff note that more opportunities for collaborative learning and participation during the school day and after school, based upon needs identified by parents and staff members, are possible for the school community. Specifically, based on data from the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, only 69% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. This is an increase from 2016-17 (in which only 58% of parents responded similarly to this question, as compared to the district average of 78% in response to this question), though still evidences an opportunity to further develop strong family and community ties. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as reported on the 2018-2019 Learning Environment Survey, at least 75% of parents/guardians will report that they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The PTA President, Parent Coordinator and Principal will meet monthly beginning in June 2018 to develop a timeline for DLMS' PTA strategy. In addition to the annual Back to School Night, DLMS will invite parents to grade specific Welcome Breakfasts to meet key personnel and prepare for specific needs of each grade level (i.e., the transition to middle school and HS admissions). All parents 6/2018- 6/2019 All parents 9/2018 The Association to Benefit Children will provide at least two parent workshops as well as individual family support to address needs surfaced throughout the school year. All students and parents 9/2018- 6/2019 PTA President, Parent Coordinator, Principal Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, PTA President, Principal PTA President, Guidance Counselor, Association to Benefit Children staff Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Conduct parent workshops based upon topics suggested by parents (SLT and PTA recommendations), including supporting middle school students’ academic success in partnership with community-based organizations to occur during PTA meetings. Families will be contacted to participate in schoolwide events through multiple means: phone calls, backpacked fliers, email and through the Pupil Path platform. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All parents 9/2018- 6/2019 All parents 9/2018-6/2019 All families, Parent Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Association to Benefit Children, After-School All-Stars, Urban Advantage, NBA Cares, Salesforce Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. The PTA President, Parent Coordinator and Principal will have monthly meetings (in addition to PTA meetings) to discuss specific needs and programming. 2. Parent engagement time will be dedicated to developing year-long maps and identifying rich opportunities for parent involvement in content-area activities during the school day and at PTA meetings; 5  3. As appropriate, outside agencies will be invited to facilitate workshops alongside teachers, including in partnership with the Association to Benefit Children. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, 100% of teachers will have hosted a family engagement event through which 70% of families will have the opportunity to spend time in classrooms and help with school-wide events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. March survey data and attendance sheets from parent events including SLCs, Back to School Night, etc. and school-administered survey results, leading to increased results on the School Quality Guide. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Low mastery on school-based assessments, students reading below grade-level, students who have not yet demonstrated proficiency as measured by the NYSESLAT, students performing below grade level as measured by the NYS ELA assessment Low mastery on school-based assessments, students performing below grade level as measured by the NYS Math assessment Low mastery on school-based assessments, students performing below grade level as measured by the beginning of year diagnostic Low mastery on school-based assessments, students performing below grade level as measured by the Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small-groupELA support Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school Small group During the school day and after school Small group During the school day and after school Small group During the school day and after school Small group Math support using standards-based trackers Small group Science support using standards-based trackers Small group Social Studies support using standards-based trackers for re-mastery 7  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) beginning of year diagnostic Teacher recommendation, student request, parent request, attendance below 90% (current year or previous), knowledge of acute traumatic event, and others. Small group support Small group and/or individual During the school day and after school 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students receive at-risk counseling services, dress code items, instructional supplies, and after school programming at no cost to student's family. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. As part of the hiring and interview process, school leaders prioritize teachers who are HQ, hold certification(s) in multiple areas and are bilingual. Strategies for retention include ongoing professional development, participation in DOE programs (Model Teacher, Collaborative Action Research Project, Computer Science 4 All, BSEP, etc.), and partnerships with Community-Based Organizations (i.e., Urban Advantage), in order to further develop capacity for teacher leadership. Staff members are invited to take on formal and informal leadership roles including Testing Coordinator, Department Facilitator(s) and Grade Chair(s). 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Weekly professional development (staff-wide and individual) will be differentiated based on staff members’ interests and areas in need of further support as identified during informal and formal observations and teacher reflection. The topics therein will address Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, Academic and Personal Behaviors, bilingual strategies, culturally relevant pedagogy and the continued implementation of the CCLS. Moneys from the yearly budget will also be set aside to fund continuing education and professional development for those staff members who are identified as non-“HQT”. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 1  n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school MoSL selection committee meets during the Fall and throughout the year to review assessment selections, timelines, time devoted to/required for assessments, and provide feedback regarding the types and uses of the assessments specific to student learning and teacher effectiveness. The feedback and recommendations from these meetings are incorporated into the assessment decisions made by the MoSL selection committee. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) x x Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 136613.00 0 12366 x x 2  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 1654238 x X x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 3   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Dual Language Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA)) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, newly revived Parent Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Dual Language Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level (e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology); ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the revived Parent Teacher Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Student-led Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, revived Parent Teacher Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events in partnership with Urban Advantage and other organizations; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library with instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Dual Language Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 7  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting student-led parent-teacher conferences twice per year during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Contract are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 8  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Student-ledConferences; ● sending home weekly Progress Reports to keep parents updated on student academic progress. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 9  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s revived Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn by living up to the REACH values. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The direct, supplemental ENL service program, provided in English with native language support (as needed), is designed to support the students' proficiency in the English language through targeted after school support. The program will serve 41 students in grades 6, 7, and 8 identified as Limited English Proficient (LEP) as follows: all students identified as Newcomers (8), Entering (1), Emerging (7), Expanding (25) according to the 2018 NYSESLAT results will participate in two 1-hour sessions of supplemental instruction (Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:35 -3:35p.m.). There will be 4 separate classes in which will be in mixed-grade groups based on NYSESLAT proficiency, ELA scores (where applicable), DRP scores (where applicable) and teacher observation. Teachers who provide the service during the direct-supplemental ENL service program (two ENL-certified teachers and two Bilingually-certified teachers) will provide instruction. The language of instruction is English. The program will begin during the October 2018 and continue through June 2019 for approximately 25 weeks. Teachers will use teacher-designed and curriculum-embedded materials, including modified Engage NY modules, trade books, Mosa Mack Science, Passport to Social Studies and related resources. Instruction will be a combination of learning activities to reinforce in-class learning and specific ENL-strategies. All participating teachers will be responsible for planning and implementing the ENL curriculum during the supplemental instructional program. Students will be progress-monitored using the DRP, which will be administered next in January 2019. Instructional materials are specific to the after-school program. Student gains will be measured using performance results on the DRP , 2019 NYSESLAT (pending), 2019 NYS ELA examination (pending) and teacher-developed assessments. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Dual Language Middle School's instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year is to improve student outcomes by ensuring that all students have equitable access to content, rigorous instruction, and critical thinking across content areas, resulting in increased student engagement and ownership. ENL teachers will specifically be supported through the following means: DOE-Sponsored ENL PL: One ENL teacher will attend monthly ENL meetings, turnkeying learning to colleagues at DLMS. 2  Part C: Professional Development The series of workshops will facilitate continuous learning among ELL educators. Each session aims to deepen participants' understanding and knowledge of ELL policies and effective instruction. The instructional focus is on literacy across disciplines. This series will use the knowledge-building approach to developing language in unit design within an Advanced Literacy framework. Participants will learn to design instructional units for knowledge building in content areas and reflect on their practices in the classrooms to affect students’ learning. Topics include: Topic One: Knowledge-building approach to developing language – Unit Design in Advanced Literacy Framework Dates: 9/21/18 Topic Two: Design learning tasks in content area units Dates: 10/23/18 Topic Three: Scaffold Interactive Learning tasks in units Dates : 11/29/18 Topic Four: Bring It Together – Units for ENL Co-teaching and Stand-Alone Classrooms Dates: 01/17/19 Topic Five: Share of Learning – What Was the Impact on Learning? 02/07/19 The series of workshops will facilitate continuous learning among ELL educators. Each session aims to deepen participants' understanding and knowledge of ELL policies and effective instruction. The instructional focus is on literacy across disciplines. This series will use the knowledge-building approach to developing language in unit design within an Advanced Literacy framework. Participants will learn to design instructional units for knowledge building in content areas and reflect on their practices in the classrooms to affect students’ learning. Weekly ENL/ELA Team Meetings: ENL and ELA teachers will meet with the Instructional Coach 4th Period every Wednesday. Topics will include intervisitation, long-term ENL support and action plans Monthly MSQI Support: Our Middle School Quality Initiative Coach will meet with all ELA/ENL teachers once a month to discuss text selection, the DRP assessment and instructional strategies. Collaborative Action Research Project: A team of 5 teachers and the Principal meet weekly for an action research project dedicated to bilingual and ENL instructional supports. The team attends PLs facilitated by the Central Office of Curriculum, Assessment and Professional Learning as well as meets independently to discuss intervistiation, instructional strategies, and related activities. Once per trimester, the team presents to the fill staff during monthly PL. Fordham PL Series: As offered, DLMS teachers attend PL's hosted by the Fordham University Regional Bilingual Support Resource Network. For example, Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent workshops will be held four times per year for an hour and a half during in order to support the parents of LEP students. Workshops will be provided by the Parent Coordinator, Blanca Ortiz, in collaboration with Ms. Arlenys Rojas, guidance counselor. During these workshops, parents are invited to visit classrooms and explore ways to best support their child's 3 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities academic success. Parent interest and needs were determined in consultation with the School Leadership Team, school survey results and through qualitative interviews conducted with parents, which yielded interest in the workshops listed. Workshops will take place: November 15th at 5:00 p.m. (Cybersafety and use of technology to support learning at home) and May 16 at 9 a.m. (Enrichment opportunities for ELL students during the summer). Sessions are designed to support parents of ENL students in understanding the academic expectations at DLMS, how the DLMS expectations prepare students for high school and how parents can support this work at home. These programs will be paid for by funds other than Title III. Parents are notified of workshops in four ways: calendars are sent home outlining workshops, workshop notices are sent home with students, calendars are emailed home using PupilPath and direct outreach is conducted by the parent coordinator. Translation services will be provided by bilingual staff and teachers. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4  5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 3 School Name Dual Language Middle School Borough Manhattan School Number 247 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Caitlin Caldwell Coach None ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Cahn Teacher/Subject Area Alexa Goldstrom/Math Teacher/Subject Area Sasha Arias/HLA/Social Studies Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal None Coach None School Counselor Arlenys Rojas Parent Maria Caseres Parent Coordinator Blanca Ortiz Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics 6  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 195 Total number of ELLs 59 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 30.26% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 1 1 7 0 1 1 8 0 1 1 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 3 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At the beginning of each year, a Fountas-Pinnell aligned reading assessment is administered to all students regardless of English Language Proficiency. The assessment, administered in October 2015, revealed that none of the English Language Learners enrolled were reading on grade-level. Further, 100% of ELLs, regardless of proficiency, currently demonstrate reading proficiency at least two levels below grade level. This data is used to drive student groups within our small-group literacy program, also known as "Book Club". English Language Learners in the Advanced range of proficiency, as well as former ELLs and Englis Proficient students, are grouped according to independent reading levels. Small-group reading instruction is then provided to the students using texts within 7  students' instructional reading level. Additionally, all teachers utilize students' reading levels to provide leveled content-area texts within content-area instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs using multiple quantitative and qualitative data points. First, every student in our school completes a Fountas-Pinnell leveled reading assessment at least three times per year. This assessment allows our teachers and school leaders to evaluate the effectiveness of our small-group leveled reading program (Book Club) which serves to accelerate students reading proficiency. Students' improved reading proficiency as measured by these assessments is one way in which we evaluate the success of the programs provided to ELLs. Additionally, we examine students outcomes as measured by the NYS Math, ELA and Science tests specific to the ELL subgroup. We consider the percentage of students who demonstrate exemplary proficiency gains each year and use those results to better focus our efforts in supporting ELL students' learning. During the 2014-2015 school year, 50% of ELLs performed at a 2 or higher with respect to ELA. With respect to Math, 60.%% of ELLs performed at a level 2 or higher. Finally, we analyze the results of the NYSESLAT examination each year to identify the percentage of students demonstrating proficiency and those who demonstrate at least one level of improvement. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. General trends indicate that students in all grades consistently demonstrate the highest levels of proficiency in the speaking, listening, and sometimes the reading comprehension portions of the NYSESLAT. This can be attributed to the fact that English Language Learners practice listening and speaking skills in all content areas throughout the school day, as well as during push-in and small-group ESL instruction. Additionally, all teachers incorporate cooperative learning activities into daily lessons to encourage listening and spoken language proficiency of all students, especially English Language Learners. Progress was made in the reading comprehension section as compared to last year due to interventions through multi-modal ESL support, including small group and computer-based literacy instruction. In contrast, students have demonstrated the lowest levels of proficiency in writing. This need is being addressed by incorporating more written work across all contents areas and focusing on ELL strategies and scaffolds schoolwide. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 8  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The program model is a "block" model comprised of heterogeneously-grouped ELL students. Students identified as ELLs receive stand alone ESL using a co-teaching model in their ELA course. They receive integrated ENL within content-area instruction to support learning in math, social studies, science, and other content areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. English Language Learners participate in dual language instruction with push-in ENL support. They receive Native Language Arts instruction and bilngual instruction in math and social studies. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students mandated to participate in the NYSESLAT exam during the current academic year receive ESL services during their daily program as push-in or co-teaching support in English Language Arts. Students who demonstrate NYSESLAT results within the Entering, Emerging, or Transitioning proficiency range receive small group Freestanding ESL for 360 minutes in addition to 315 minutes of integrated ENL in English Language Arts instruction. Students who demonstrate results within the Expanding and Commanding range according to the NYSESLAT receive 180 minutes of ESL instruction in addition to the 315 minutes of integrated ENL in ELA instruction. Additionally, 180 minutes of native language arts instruction is provided in students' native language, Spanish in both NLA and Social Studies. Finally, students also receive Social Studies instruction provided in Spanish for 180 minutes per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In all three grades students are provided Social Studies instruction in Spanish, which is the native language of students who are identified as ELLs during the current school year. English and Spanish language resources are gathered from TCI resources, as well as those resources which are translated from English by the bilingual teachers. English Language Arts, Science, Mathematics, and the Arts are provided in English with ESL supports (scaffolding, translations when appropriate, and bilingual glosseries). Science and Math instruction are delivered in English, however, Spanish language supports are provided in these content areas through the workshop model with language scaffolds. Methods include explicit vocabulary instruction within the content areas, use of annotated supports and visual models, implementation of technological resources for presentation and response, and multiple methods of response when appropriate. Further, teachers provide scaffolds which provide students access to the content or critical thinking required within the curriculum in the native language when appropriate. Curriculum in Math, Science, Social Studies, and ELA are aligned with the CCLS and are collaboratively created by teachers. Teachers in Math, Science, Social Studies, and ELA utilize SmartBoard technology, Googledocs, and supplemental technology resources through a 1-to-1 laptop to student program. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated using school-based reading and Math assessments to identify students' levels of mastery within the grade level curriculum. Students are evaluated in their native language in consultation with the ESL provider, Social Studies, and NLA teachers through the use of teacher made assessments. Students present oral reports, engage in classroom discussions which are evaluated by teachers, and complete reading and writing tasks which are both provided in Spanish and aligned with the CCLS. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? a. SIFE 9  b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Those students who are identified as SIFE we use the LAB-R and school-based reading and Math assessments to identify students' levels of mastery within the grade level curriculum. These students are provided small group support by content-area teachers and ESOL co-teachers within content-area instruction in order to differentiate and address students' learning and linguistic needs. Finally, students are provided enrichment throughout the school day and access to after school programs for small group instructional support and experiential learning in order to further build background knowledge and provide students' with relevant, non-classroom experiences that support instructional outcomes. ELL subgroups experience differentiated, small-group literacy instruction rooted in students' independent reading levels and aligned with NYSESLAT and LAB-R outcomes. Those students performing within the Entering or Emerging range also have an oportunity to participate in intensive, small group literacy instruction through a program called READ 180. In order to enhance all ELL students' language proficiency, language support is provided as a part of the general education curriculum. During the 2011-2012 year, Dual Language Middle School began implementing a computer-based reading comprehension and fluency program that is research based and proven to improve language development of ELLs as a part of the ESL program. With respect to assessments, Emerging Bilinguals are given all examinations first in the language of instruction, with a supplemental examination in the students’ native language (in this case, Spanish) for reference. All ELL students participate in Spanish language instruction in order to strengthen the transference of language development in both native and second language. Sixth, seventh, and eighth grade ELL students and ELL students with disabilities participate in the general education curriculum full-time with push-in support. Finally, Visual Art is offered at least two periods per week and performing arts (Dance) a minimum of three periods per week for all students, including ELLs and ELLs with disabilities. For SIFE students, small group instruction is utilized within the regular school day in all content areas order to ensure students are developing appropriate academic and linguistic skills which will advance language proficiency and content-area learning. For Newcomer ELLs who have been receiving ESL services for 0-3 years, small group instruction and individualized supports are provided based on students' needs identified through the use both state and teacher generated assessments sorted in a standards-based tracker. Students are provided guided notes and modified homework assignments which address needs specific to the Entering and Emerging range of English proficiency. Students are also included in a technology-based Reading support program three times per week during the regular school day to accelerate language proficiency. For Developing ELLs who have been receiving ESL services ofr 4 - 6 years, small group instruction and modified graphic organizers, classwork assignments, and homework assignments are utilized to address the needs specific to the Transitioning and Expanding range of English proficiency. For Long Term ELLs who have been receiving ESL services for more than 6 years (Long Term ELLs), students are provided with appropriately modified guided notes supports, glossaries, and vocabulary instruction which appropriately address the needs of students within the Advanced proficiency. Former ELLs receive testing accommodations and targeted or small-group teacher support in all content areas to continue supporting students' language proficiency maintenance for two years following demonstration of proficiency as measured by the NYSESLAT. All ELLs receive time and a half during both state and school-based assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Small-group instruction and student-specific scaffolding, as well as modeling and graphic organizers, are utilized to provide ELL-SWD students with access to the grade-level curriculum. In Social Studies and Sciece teachers provide content-area texts 0  which are aligned to students' instructional reading levels in order to accelerate students' English language development but which also reflect the grade-level concepts being learned. Teachers strategically identify the core concepts required in each content area to leverage improved student outcomes and scaffold students' assessments and learning tasks in alignment with these decisions. Additionally, all teachers identify content-specific vocabulary and explicitly teach these target words within instruction in addition to content-area concepts. Materials used are scaffolded texts, graphic organizers and modified homework, bilingual resources in Math, Science and Social Studies, visuals and videos, whole class and small group tier 3 vocabulary instruction using the Frayer Model, etc. All of these materials accelerate students English language acquisition by giving them access to the language that is scaffolded just beyond their ZPD so that they are constantly challenged to improve their language use both in class and on homework. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school utilizes students' IEP recommendations, as well NYS Exam data and content-area diagnostic assessments in order to ensure that students are placed in classroom environments which meet their diverse learning needs. In addition to the use of small-group instruction and student-specifc scaffolding, all ESL services and Special Education Teacher Support and ICT services are provided through a push-in model of support in order to provide students with access to the curriculum in the least restrictive environment. All ELL-SWDs also receive supplemental, small-group reading instruction based upon gender and independent reading levels. This program is provided to all students, including those who are identified as English proficient. These practices ensure that all students have access to the grade-level curriculum, thereby advancing students' through content as they achieve their IEP goals and develop English proficiency. Students are placed in the ICT program after reviewing the IEP recommendations made during the student's most recent annual review. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Although we are not a strict Dual-Language model school, we do offer an English/Spanish Dual Language approach to Native Language instruction across all three grades. The language needs of ELL students inform instruction across all content areas in several ways. In order to enhance listening, reading, and writing skills, all students identified as LEP participate in small group literacy intervention three times per week. The literacy intervention, known as Book Club, focuses on differentiating instruction to meet students’ comprehension needs at their instructional reading level in English. After school programs allow homogenous ELL groups (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding, respectively) to work within their own proficiency levels in a small group setting. Those ELLs in need of intensive ELA support (Entering and Emerging or long term ELLs still at or below transitioning) are identified using the results of the NYSESLAT exam and the NYS ELA exam, when available. During the 2014-2015 school year, 50% of ELLs demonstrated grade level mastery on the ELA exam. These ELLs participate in additional enrichment during both extended day and after school programs. ELA support is offered primarily in English; NLA support is offered in Spanish. Those ELLs in need of intensive ELA intervention participate in additional small-group enrichment during both extended day and after school programs. A review of the NYS Mathematics exam data from 2014-2015 revealed that 13.7% of ELLs scored within the Level 3 or Level 4 range. Those students who scored within the Level 2 and Level 1 range have been identified as ELLs in need of intensive Mathematics intervention who participate in additional enrichment during both extended day and after school programs. Math intervention is provided in both English and Spanish. Those ELLs in need of intensive Mathematics intervention participate in additional small-group enrichment during both extended day and after school programs. With respect to Social Studies, students are provided small group, in-class instruction which focuses upon strenthening students' content area knowledge and language proficiency in both Spanish and English. During the school day all teachers participate in collaborative planning meetings within and among departments in order to 1  enhance language instruction within the content areas. Within the ESL program, specifically, all ESL instruction is delivered within the core content areas. Students' schedules and service provision reflect students needs and proficiency levels, as follows: for those students within the beginner range of language proficiency, ESL services are provided according to mandates within ELA and small group literacy in addition to Social Studies instruction. For those students within the intermediate or advanced ranges of proficiency, ESL is provided within ELA and Social Studies instruction. In all content areas teachers use SmartBoards, individual computers, and audiovisual equipment (including video clips and audiobooks, as appropriate) to engage and supoort students' language development and overall learning. With respect to language electives, a unique feature of Dual Language Middle School is Spanish language and literacy instruction: one-hundred percent of students, including English Language Learners, participate in Spanish language instruction during all three years of enrollment. Patterns identified in all four modalities inform instruction in several ways. In order to enhance listening, reading, and writing skills, all students identified as LEP participate in small group literacy intervention three times per week. The literacy intervention, known as Book Club, focuses on differentiating instruction to meet students’ comprehension needs at their instructional reading level. Time allotted during the extended school day also allows ELLs small group, free-standing ESL instruction. After school programs allow homogenous ELL groups (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding, respectively) to work within their own proficiency levels in a small group setting. Those ELLs in need of intensive ELA and/or Mathematics intervention participate in additional small-group enrichment during both extended day and after school programs. With respect to Social Studies, Science, ELA, and Math, teachers utilize mastery trackers to identify standards in need of further instruction and to develop methods of providing ELLs with targeted support (small group instruction, use of models and visual aids, basic skills intervention) to ensure mastery. These trackers are also used to identify target ELL students with whom teachers work closely during small group instruction within the regular class period. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year we will enhance the implementation of the READ180 platform for reading instruction in order to support ELL students' development with respect to reading. We will also be implementing small-group Math support for ELL students during the school day. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/S 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs participate in a comprehensive visual and performing Arts program which is provided within the regular instructional program. Finally, all ELLs are enrolled in the school-based afterschool program at no cost to families. Long-term and former ELLs are provided supplemental content-area support as a part of the afters chool program. During this time ELLs may participate in musical theater, homework help, Science Club, and dance team, should they choose. Students and families of ELLs are invited to participate through direct parent contact and invitations to participate which are sent home in both English and Spanish. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All teachers utilize SmartBoard technology in order to support students who are identified as ELLs as well as all students in the classroom. Additionally, teachers provide students with content-area materials in students' native language(s) when appropriate. Native language materials include translated editions of primary source texts and content-area texts, Spanish-English glossaries, Spanish-English dictionaries, and oral translations (when appropriate). 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language materials include translated editions of primary source texts and content-area texts, Spanish-English glossaries, Spanish-English dictionaries, and oral translations (when appropriate). Native language skills are also taught within 2  Native Language Arts, including grade-level writing skills, grammar, syntax, and comprehension of primary/technical texts in students' native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At the middle school level it is essential that students have access to all of the content within regular classroom instruction. As a result, all services are provided within the content-area classrooms in order to ensure students' needs are met using methods and content reflective of the grade-level curriculum. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All teachers utilize SmartBoard technology in order to support students who are identified as ELLs as well as all students in the classroom. Additionally, teachers provide students with content-area materials in students' native language(s) when appropriate. Native language materials include translated editions of primary source texts and content-area texts, Spanish-English glossaries, Spanish-English dictionaries, and oral translations (when appropriate). 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parents and families of newly enrolled ELLs, including the newly enrolled student(s), are invited to meet with the parent coordinator, ESL teacher, and Language Access Coordinator at the begnning of the year to discuss the program options and academic programs available within the school. Families of new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year also meet with the LAC, ESL teacher, and parent coordinator to assist students in transitioning into the school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Students participate in Native (Spanish) Language Arts within the regular program. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? All students receive at least seven periods of Dual Language instruction in the target language in each grade. English Proficient Students and ELLs are integrated during the entire instructional day. A sample schedule for a beginner ELL is: 1st Period: Native Language Arts 2nd Period: Math 3rd Period: ELA (ESL push-in) 4th Period: Dance 5th Period: Social Studies (in Spanish) 6th Period: ELA 7th Period: Small Group ESL (Science is included also, however, not on this particular day). The target language, Spanish, is the language of instruction for both Native Language Arts and Social Studies. The Dual Language model of instruction for ELA and NLA is a modified side-by-side approach, as skills taught during ELA are reinforced in NLA. Emergent literacy is addressed 3  through a simultaneous approach. EP students take a school-based diagnostic in Spanish at the beginning of the year. In their NLA class they are assessed formally 6 times during the year and then the whole school takes the ELE at the end of the year. The 2015 ELE showed that 60% of EPs are above the 50 th percentile in Spanish reading. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In addition to ESL support, all content area teachers incorporate ESL strategies into classroom instruction. Teachers participate in no fewer than 5 professional development sessions (a total of 7.5 hours) focusing upon strategies to support ELLs in language acquisition across content areas. Instructional staff use multiple resources, including Building Academic Vocabulary by John Marzano and Classroom Instruction That Works with English Language Learners by Jane D. Hill and Kathleen M. Flynn to improve content area instruction for ELL students in all content areas. All staff participate in professional development every Monday during the school year. Professional development is provided by school leaders and teacher leaders focusing upon: strategies for providing differentiated instruction which meets the needs of ELLs, Common Core Learning Standards, and strategies for supporting students in acquisition of academic vocabulary and improved reading comprehension, as well as the use of data to drive instruction. Also the ENL specialists meet on a weekly basis to plan instruction and professional development for teachers and staff. The parent coordinator meets weekly with the school leader and teacher leaders to discuss strategies for outreach to ELLs and their parents. (No fulltime secretary at the school). In-house Professional development focuses upon: strategies for providing differentiated instruction which meets the needs of all levels of ELLs in all modalities and Common Core Learning Standards. Staff also work collaboratively to implement strategies driven by the Universal Design for Learning in order to ensure that all students have access to curricula regardless of students' level of English proficiency. All instructional staff members including the principal, ENL coordinator, ENL teacher, content area teachers (bilingual and monolingual), guidance counselor, and Special Education teachers are thoroughly trained in backwards planning and models of explicit vocabulary instruction that is rooted in data and language need. Also ENL and bilingual teachers are encouraged to attend relavent PD outside of school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All of the aforementioned school staff utilize strategies from professional development and ample co-planning opportunities with ESL certified staff to ensure differentiation based upon the linguistic and learning needs of ELLs across the curriculum. The parent coordinator meets with the principal and LAC to discuss transition supports for students from middle school to high school. The guidance counselor receives training in selection of appropriate high school programs for ELLs of all levels so that she can better assist parents and students in their high school application choices. The parent coordinator and guidance counselor also meet with all parents during the high school application process to ensure students are prepared for the transition and that parents make informed choices about schools which best meet the needs of their child(ren). The professional development plan for 2015-16 includes participation in the Bank Street Language Series and professional development opportunities provided by DELLSS such that 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers are ELL-specific professional development. Records, including sign-in sheets, agendas, notes, and supporting materials, are retained at the school level. 4  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Dual Language Middle School uses multiple approaches to ensure that parents understand program choices available for all English Language Learners. In September, DLMS hosts a parent orientation for all parents of students new to the DLMS community. During this meeting parents are informed of the programs available within the school. Each month parents are invited to attend school-based events (September 26, October 31, November 27, December 19, January 31, February 28, March 28, May 22, and June 23) as well as PTA meetings (September 26, October 24, November 22, December 19, January 30, February 27, March 27, April 24, May 29, and June 12). School administrators, faculty and staff, office support staff and the Parent Coordinator work collaborate in order to provide parent workshops and opportunities for parent involvement throughout the school year. At minimum, two workshops per year focus upon the needs of ELL students and their parents. Translation and interpretation supports are available during all of the workshops, both written and spoken by the bilingual teachers and staff. The ENL teaechers (Ms. Cahn and Ms. Goldstrom) will hold annual individual meetings with all parents of ELLs at least twice a year to discuss progress in English acquisition and ELL level. For every parent meeting held, an attendance sheet will be signed, as well as a copy of any materials distributed. Notes will be recorded in each students ancedotal file during individual meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Dual Language Middle School uses multiple approaches to ensure that parents understand program choices available for all English Language Learners. In September, DLMS hosts a parent orientation for all parents of students new to the DLMS community. During this meeting parents are informed of the programs available within the school. Each month parents are invited to attend school-based events. School administrators, faculty and staff, office support staff and the Parent Coordinator work collaborate in order to provide parent workshops and opportunities for parent involvement throughout the school year. At minimum, two workshops per year focus upon the needs of ELL students and their parents. Translation and interpretation supports are available during all of the workshops. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Caitlin Caldwell, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Dual Language Middle School School DBN: 03M247 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Caitlin Caldwell Blanca Ortiz Maria Cahn Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Caserez Parent Alexa Goldstrom/ Math Teacher/Subject Area Sasha Arias/HLA/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Arlenys Rojas School Counselor Ilene Atschul Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/28/15 1/1/01 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 10/28/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/28/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 03M247 School Name: Dual Language Middle School Superintendent: Ilene Altschul The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Blanca Ortiz Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess our written and oral interpretation needs, we consult home language indicators per ATS, as well as parental preference which is indicated during one-on-one conversations with the LAC, ENL coordinator, Guidance Counselor, and/or students' advisors on staff. DLMS has several staff members, including our Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor, who are native Spanish speakers, as well as many members, including our Principal, who are proficient Spanish speakers and writers. All written communications between the school and students’ homes are provided in both languages as a matter of school protocol. All school functions, such as Open School Night, graduation, and other celebrations, are also conducted bilingually. A bilingual staff member is always available to facilitate parent-teacher conferences if the need arises. Additionally, our bilingual school aides are always available to assist any non-English speaking parent at school. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Chinese 168 79 3 67.2 31.6 1.3 171 76 3 68.4 30.4 1.3 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Available in English and Spanish, translated in-house Available in English and Spanish, translated in-house Available in English and Spanish, translated in-house Handbook September Monthly Calendar Monthly Advisory Notices As needed 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open School Night September interpretation service(s)? Presented in English and Spanish simultaneously 9  Student-led Conferences December and March Spring Arts Showcase late May PTA Meetings Monthly Presented in English and Spanish simultaneously, depending on individual parent need Presented in English and Spanish simultaneously Presented in English and Spanish simultaneously 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our office is fully staffed with bilingual (English and Spanish) individuals to meet the needs of families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members will received a copy of Chancellor's Reg A-663 during BOY faculty conferences and it will be listed in the staff handbook for reference. Questions can be addressed to the principal at any time. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All of these materials will be made available at the beginning of the school year. All parental notification translation and interpretation needs for the DLMS community are met in-house. All notices to parents are sent home in both English and Spanish throughout the year. Due to the nature of the school, i.e. a Spanish-English dual language program, and analyses of HLIS, English and Spanish are the only languages needed to communicate information to parents. All notices, schoolwide events, parent-teacher conferences, parent workshops, etc. are provided in both English and Spanish to consistently meet the language needs of our school community. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Language Access Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, and School Principal will gather feedback from parents during parent workshops and conferences. They will discuss concerns and recommendations based upon the feedback and will make adjustments accordingly, on a bi-monthly basis. 0  1 
