 02M281 School Name: THE RIVER SCHOOL Principal: JESSICA ORLEANS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 02M281 The River School 310200010281 PK-5 425 East 35Street New York, NY. 10016 212-251-6640 Phone Number: 212-251-6645 Fax: DariaAgosta dhughes11@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 2 Email Address: Jessica Orleans Kelly Herbig Andrea Levitt Meredith Wilk N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Bonnie Laboy Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue, Room 713 New York, NY, 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3815 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan,District 2 Yuet Chu FSC: Executive Director: 333 Seventh Ave, 8th floor New York , NY, 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646-470-0721 Phone Number: 917-339-1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Jessica Orleans Kelly Herbig Andrea Levitt N/A N/A N/A N/A Suraj Khatwani David Sall Cara Weiss Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jennifer Stein Erika Mondschein Meredith Wilk Leah Savage N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/ Parent Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? What We Believe: Educators at The River School believe that all children have vast capacities for learning that flourish when provided with opportunities to engage in their natural curiosity. We strive to educate the whole child by providing an inclusive environment where students can grow intellectually, emotionally, socially and physically. Our mission as a school is to   inspire a love of learning in our students, not just about books and numbers, but also about the world around them. We encourage our students to be independent thinkers and to feel safe taking intellectual risks. We believe that students should have the opportunity to express their talents and interests in many ways and strive to provide multiple experiences to enhance their learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Who We Are: The River School (02M281) is a pre-kindergarten through fifth grade elementary school in Manhattan. Our school, located in Midtown East, draws from the Kips Bay, Murray Hill, and Tudor City neighborhoods. Due to our close proximity of the United Nations, where many of our families work, our school has an extremely diverse community made up of students from thirty countries with many languages spoken. In addition to our large ENL population we also have students with special needs in our ICT classrooms. Curriculum and Academic Program: Literacy is at the core of all learning, including reading, writing, listening and speaking. On a daily basis, students participate in a rich, balanced literacy program rooted in the workshop model. This includes reading and writing workshop where students engage in read-aloud, shared reading, guided reading, independent reading, interactive writing, shared writing as well as word study. Each class reads and writes across a variety of genres and studies authentic, rich literature as well as non-fiction texts. We teach students strategies to become thoughtful readers and writers who can comprehend a wide range of genres and make connections to themselves, other texts and the larger world. Our teachers use a comprehensive, concept-based mathematics curriculum. Students explore materials, learn math strategies, recognize math in their world and become curious, capable mathematicians. Students are given the opportunities to wonder, question, discover and articulate their mathematical understanding of real life, complex problems. Each class has a daily math workshop in their classroom. Students are immersed in rich thematic inquiry studies about a variety of topics throughout the year. Each study lasts several weeks and allows students to study a big idea in-depth. When participating in studies, students engage in fieldwork, sketching, reading and writing to learn all about a topic. Our thematic inquiry studies integrate writing, reading, mathematics, the arts and science. By immersing our students in inquiry learning we believe our students gain greater meaning from what they are learning. Through inquiry studies, students build upon their previous knowledge to create a deeper and more complex understanding of the world. Through inquiry studies, students have the opportunity to act as researcher, scientist, reporter and expert. Our specialty programs include science, music, and physical education. The Lab ties together several disciplines including science, technology, engineering, art and math. In music, all students learn to play the keyboard. Additionally, we provide our school community with enrichment programs throughout the year including Art Farm NYC, Studio In a School, coding and robotics. Our after-school partnership with Wingspan Arts, an arts-based after-school organization, offers classes such as Rock Band, Karate, Mini Musical and Pop Art, to broaden arts learning for students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Due to our close proximity to the United Nations, where many of our families work, our school has an extremely diverse community made up of students from over twenty countries with many languages spoken. In addition to our large ENL population we also have students with special needs in our ICT classes. Both these populations of learners require highly intensive language support throughout the instructional day. ICT students require specially designed 0  instruction to ensure progress towards both their IEP goals and the grade level standards. ENL students require frequent opportunities to engage in speaking and listening tasks to increase their English language fluency. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Last year, we focused on fostering strong family-community ties as well as creating a supportive environment where students, families and community members felt valued, included and safe. We achieved our goals through clear communication between teachers and parents, collaboration between teachers, administration and families and consistent school-wide practices. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M281 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 272 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 28.0% % Attendance Rate 23.9% % Reduced Lunch 18.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 12.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 43.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.12 0% 36% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 75.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 19 19 95.3% 3.7% 14.7% 8.5% 32.7% 2.6% 0 0% 6.9 81.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The River School works to ensure our young learners are prepared with the skills and knowledge necessary to succeed. Specifically, The River School utilizes the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project curriculum for literacy instruction including the subgroup of students for whom English is not their first language. In September, teachers conduct a baseline literacy assessment for all students. Initial data identified decoding and comprehension as two instructional focus areas to support reading development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, classroom teachers will implement rigorous classroom instruction aligned to the Teacher College Reading and Writing Project Curriculum, resulting in 75% of students meeting or exceeding grade level benchmarks in literacy as demonstrated by Fountas and Pinnell (F&P) running records. 3 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students 10/21 Teachers, Data Specialist 2/10 6/9 All students Professional learning time Mondays 2:50-4:10 September-June Principal, teachers, TCRWP Coach SIT, SBST, Teacher(s), Related Service Providers, Principal Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will administer Fountas and Pinnell running records three times per year and analyze data to ascertain learning objectives and explicit teaching strategies. Teachers will analyze formative and end-of-unit assessments to diagnose areas of strength and growth for all students. Professional development will focus on assessing student work to inform instruction. Strategy groups will be created based upon student needs. English as a New Language (ENL) and Special Education teachers will meet together with classroom teachers to analyze student data to determine instructional next steps. SWDs, ELLs, at-risk students Monthly September-June Teachers will inform families of their child’s reading level during in-person meetings and Parent/Teacher conference periods. Families, students Parent engagement time (Tuesdays, 7:50-8:25 am) and Parent Teacher Conferences (November, March) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to a school-wide Curriculum Night in mid-September, facilitated by teachers, to learn about the curriculum, Common Core and grade-level expectations. Families will receive resources at this event to support their understanding of grade level instruction. Throughout the year, there will be frequent opportunities for families 4  to visit their child's classroom in addition to Progress Report meetings in November and March. Our school's Parent Coordinator will oversee all family engagement opportunities and serve as a liaison to families for support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. F&P Benchmark Assessment Kits, leveled classroom libraries, Teachers College Readers Writers Project (TCRWP) , Fundations, guided reading sets, special education teachers, targeted professional development. Schedule adjustments will be made on an as needed basis. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 mid-year Fountas and Pinnell running record will be administered and the data will be analyzed to determine if students are on track to meet our goal of 75% of students meeting or exceeding grade level benchmarks in literacy by June 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The instrument of measure that is used to assess progress is the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Examination of the data workbook included with the NYC School Quality Guide shows that strong attendance is a major factor in student success. Given that our school has a large English as a New Language (ENL) population, it's of utmost importance that all learners attend school each day so as to not fall behind. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop and implement a series of school-wide activities and recognition events to increase student engagement, resulting in school-wide attendance of above 90% for at least 100 days. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Implementation of monthly Attendance Awards distributed at school-wide River Rally to celebrate students who have achieved perfect attendance for that month. Students Attendance will be highlighted and celebrated in a monthly e-newsletter, The River Reader, written by teachers and sent to all families. Students with perfect attendance will be acknowledged on a monthly basis. Students, Parents Students who are absent for two consecutive days will receive a phone call or email from their student's teacher. Students, parents Attendance teacher will follow up with families with multiple absences via home visits, phone calls and in-person meetings. Students, parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement River Rally Assemblies, September-June River Reader is sent home third Friday of every month from September-June Throughout the school year from September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Staff, Principal Teachers, Students, Attendance teacher Teachers, Attendance teacher Attendance teacher, School Leader How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to grade-level workshops throughout the year to support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support their children at home. These workshops will be facilitated by teachers. Workshop titles include, but are not limited to, Creating Well-Rounded Learners, Building a Bridge from School to Home, Raising Readers and Writers, and Positive Discipline. Our school's Parent Coordinator will oversee the school's workshop plan and serve as a liaison to families for support. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  ATS attendance data, Monthly e-newsletter (The River Reader), Attendance teacher, Classroom teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 9th, 2019 School Leadership team members will analyze attendance data from September 2018-February 2019 to determine if school population is on track to achieve school-wide attendance of above 90%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured using ATS student attendance data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The River School has established a community of teachers who are committed to continuously improving their practice so that all students reach optimal academic and social success. Based on feedback from the 2016-2017 Quality Review, which states: "Every teacher is committed to meaningful collaboration and there are many opportunities for the staff to practice leadership and take part in key decisions", we will continue our practice of working collaboratively across the school. In order to grow and develop, teachers need to meet regularly and observe each others' classrooms to share successful instructional strategies. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will engage in a structured process for inter-visitation with colleagues focused on questioning and discussion techniques resulting in 75% of all teachers improving one performance level in Questioning and Discussion Techniques (component 3b) from Danielson's Framework for Teaching. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Once a month, during Monday's teacher professional development time, sessions will be used to discuss best practice in component 3b of Danielson's Framework for Teaching. Teachers After observing colleagues, four times throughout the year, teachers will provide instructional feedback via the inter-visitation log posted on the school's shared google drive. After each of the four inter-visitation cycles, teachers will review student data, to assess effectiveness of questioning and discussion techniques, then use this data to inform future instruction. Teachers Teachers Mondays 2:50-4:10 September-June September-June September-June Teachers, Principal Teachers Teachers, Principal During teacher professional development time, in January and June, teachers will meet in grade teams to analyze questioning and discussion data and discuss next steps. Teachers September-June Teachers, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, teachers will host Family Friday events for families. Families will be invited into their child's classroom once per month to observe instruction and participate in classroom activities. Additionally, all parents will be invited to meet with teachers during school-wide parent engagement time each Tuesday morning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, professional development coaches, meeting space for collaboration, schedule to support meeting time and inter-visitations, substitute coverage for professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 0  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, principal will review observation data from September 2018- January 2019 to assess the percentage increase in teacher performance as related to component 3B, Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Goal will be met when 15/21 teachers improve one component level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that is used to assess progress is the teacher inter-visitation feedback log as well as growth in Questioning and Discussion Techniques (component 3b). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the school’s fifth year, 18 out of 21 teachers received an effective Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) rating while 3 out of 21 teachers received a highly effective MOTP rating. Observation data showed that Questioning and Discussion Techniques (component 3b), was the lowest rated component in Danielson's Framework for Teaching. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school leader will implement a professional development plan to strengthen questioning and discussion techniques by utilizing formal observations resulting in 70% of all teachers improving one performance level in Questioning and Discussion Techniques (component 3b) from Danielson's Framework for Teaching. 2 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students (including English language learners and students with disabilities) Teachers One time per month, from September 2018 - January 2019 September-June September-June Principal, teachers, PD team Principal, teachers Principal, teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leader will meet with Professional Development team to discuss supports related to Questioning and Discussion Techniques. School leader will conduct frequent observations followed by collaborative feedback conversations with each teacher to support their growth. Bi-monthly teacher inter-visitation cycles will be focused on Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Teachers Schedule of support will be coordinated based on specific areas of growth observed during teacher observation cycle. Teachers September-June Principal, Staff developer, teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Principal will attend monthly PTA meetings and Executive Board meetings to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support the home/school connection. During curriculum night in September 2018, classroom teachers will inform parents of specific strategies to support students at home. Additionally, the Principal and select teachers will host a meet and greet event for all incoming pre-kindergarten and kindergarten families in late spring 2019 to encourage parent participation and engagement in school. The Principal, and select teachers will host informal question and answer sessions for each grade level, one time, in October 2018. During these sessions, entitled, "Coffee and Chat" parents can ask questions to clarify their understanding of ways to support children at home. The Parent Coordinator will ensure that families receive notification of these events well in advance of the sessions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  School leader, schedule to support inter-visitations and coaching, funds for professional development and instructional resources, substitute coverage for professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 10, 2019, the school leader will review all ratings in Questioning and Discussion Techniques to inform the professional development and coaching plan from February-June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that is used to assess progress is Danielson's Framework for Teaching rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data collected via parent feedback forms, on Curriculum Night in September, showed there was strong interest in workshops on the following topics: Supporting literacy and math, reinforcing positive behavior, and special education support. Based on these results, in response to parent feedback, teachers facilitate at least two grade-level workshops per year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% or more of the parent body will attend at least one grade-level parent workshop. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and school leader will create a year-long plan of grade-level parent workshops based on Curriculum Night parent survey results. Parents Specific workshops will address supporting our Special Education and English as a New Language (ENL) learner population in the area of literacy and math. Teachers will provide parents with specific literacy and math and resources to further support these student subgroups in acquiring and maintaining literacy and math proficiency. Parents of ENL and Special Education Students September-June Teachers, parents, Guidance Counselor September-June Class parents, PTA Teachers and administration will email ongoing updates, curriculum support tips and reminders as related to the workshops via our monthly River Reader e-newsletter. Teachers will lead workshops for parents of students with disabilities and English language learners on grade level topics, as related to literacy and math. At the workshops, teachers will demonstrate specific strategies parents can utilize at home to further support these subgroups with literacy and math proficiency. Parents September-June Teachers, Principal January-June Teachers Parents of students with disabilities and English language learners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, parents, parent workshop materials, technology, additional resources to support parents 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 10, 2019 parent workshop attendance records will be analyzed to assess whether or not we are on track to meet our goal of 70% parent participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure that will be used to assess progress is parent workshop surveys. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who have not shown progress afterimplementation of Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one-to one During school day Guided Reading and strategy groups, pre-teaching, re-teaching, differentiated learning centers, repeated exposure/practice, Review of checklists, visuals reading benchmarks AIS referral data sheet RTI tracking sheet Review of assessments: Word study, checklists, writing samples. Assessments administered by learning specialists Attendance 8  records Behavioral and/or social emotional concerns Mathematics Students who have not shown progress after implementation of Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions Review of math assessments AIS referral data sheet RTI tracking sheet Assessments administered by learning specialists Review of student work Science Differentiated learning centers and work tasks Small group Student assessments Social Studies AIS referral data sheet Review of student work Differentiated learning centers and work tasks Small group AIS referral data sheet Small group, one-to one During school day Strategy groups, modified work, modified tasks, multisensory use of manipulatives, pre-teaching, re-teaching, visuals During the school day During the school day 9 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who exhibit concerning social-emotional behaviors Guidance Counselor: Friends group- social skills Small group, one-to one During school day Learning Specialist: Individualized curriculum, visual schedule, checklists Parents who have contacted the school/guidance counselor about known issues, concerns Students who reach out to staff directly 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  School will provide additional supports such as books, backpacks, homework support, curriculum and parent resources. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. School received $739. 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 4  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The River School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The River School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 7  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) The River School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 8  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 9  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 0  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At The River School (02M281), we will be conducting a before and after school program for English Language Learner (ELL) students. As based on data collected from Fountas and Pinnell running record assessments, 75% of ELLs are in need of additional literacy support in order to catch up with their peers. In addition, 2018 NYSESLAT data shows that the two areas our ELLs need most support are in Speaking and Writing. Finally, qualitative data from teachers' conference notes suggest that our ELLs need more opportunities to practice their oral language . Therefore, an emphasis will be placed on supplementing and enriching ELLs in Writing by using Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project Curriculum called Up The Ladder: Accessing Grades 3-6 writing Units of Study Additionally, we will support oral language by doing Readers' Theater using Benchmark Education's Reader's Theater kits. There will be five certified teachers instructing students. Two teachers have dual certification of common branch and special education. Two teachers have common branch general education certification and the fifth teacher has dual certification of common branch and TESOL. Each student group will attend a 1 hour morning or afternoon session twice a week (either Wednesday/Thursdays from 7:30am - 8:30 am or Wednesday/Thursdays 2:50pm - 3:50 pm). The sessions will begin in November 2018 and will continue for approximately 30 weeks. The end date for Title III LEP program is June 14th. All instruction will be provided in English to accommodate for the diverse student population. The times and dates may be adjusted as needed given the school calendar and teacher schedule. During the before and after school program, an emphasis will be put on teaching interactive lessons, content, and vocabulary to the students through the use of Readers Theater, interactive technology and guided/shared reading. Materials will be purchased from HEINEMANN (Up The Ladder) and BENCHMARK EDUCATION Reader's Theater Folktales, Myths, and Legends Levels F-X Sets A & B andReader's Theater Content-Area Concepts Levels F-M Set D. Materials will be for exclusive use in the Title III program. Assessment will be fully integrated into session time to best meet individual student needs. This additional support program will help to strengthen student language skills, especially reading, writing and oral language and establish a solid foundation to build upon. The small group setting and additional teacher support offered will help students to gain confidence, which will hopefully result in more active participation in all content areas throughout the school day. There will be groups of ELL students attending the morning and afternoon sessions - first through fifth grades. There will be a 1-2nd grade group, a 3rd grade group, 4th and 5th grade group respectively. Each group will use the team-teaching and station teaching model where there will be a licensed pedagogue teaching and the ENL teacher will push-in to either team teach or station teach 50% of the time. We will be primarily using Reader's Theater materials and materials from Reading A-Z plus a variety of other materials and resources from Fountas and Pinnell, Read Works, Highlights for Kids, and other high interest low-level text sets. Additionally, teachers will incorporate hands-on experiences whenever possible. 3  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: PS 281 is an extremely diverse school, situated close to the United Nations, NYU Langone and the Chinese Mission. 27% of our students were born outside of the United States and 37% of our students indicated a home language other than English on their Home Language Identification Survey. Of our students who were foreign born, they represent 31 different countries. The entire staff must be knowledgeable about how to best support ELL students and families. Each September, all school staff receives training and information on translation and interpretation services. All of the classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and administration participate in multi-week PD cycles, on Monday afternoons from 3:00 pm - 4:10 pm, focused on supporting English Language Learners in our classrooms. Previous topics have ranged from "Writing effective content and language objectives," to "Planning Interactive Writing for ELLs." The PD sessions will be facilitated by the ENL specialist, SETTs provider, guidance counselor, classroom teachers, Universal Literacy Coach and staff from the Manhattan Field Support Center. 2018-2019 Professional Development Topics and Dates include: October 1, 2018 (3-4pm) - Supporting our ELL students across Content Areas - Facilitated by ENL Teacher (No cost to TItle 3) December 3, 2018 (3-4pm) - Developing Academic Vocabulary and Oral Language for ELLs - Co-facilitated by ENL Teacher and classroom teacher (No cost to Title 3) Social Emotional Learning for all students - Spotlight on ELLs and SWDs PD will be facilitated by Assistant Principal, SETTS provider and 3rd grade classroom teacher. Monday PD 3-4pm, Dates: 9/4, 10/22, 11/19, 12/19, 1/14, 2/11, 3/18, 4/15, 5/20, and 6/17 (No cost to Title 3) How to effectively take running records and the implications on instruction for our ELLs - Facilitated by SETSS provider and classroom teachers. Monday PD 3- 4 pm, Dates: 1/7, 2/4, 3/4, 4/1, 5/6 (No cost to Title 3) Supporting ELLs with Complex Writing Tasks - November 15th and November 29th - Two, 1 hour sessions 3-4pm (Per-session cost to Title 3 Fund - 5 teachers) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Parents are a key piece in educating our students. We want them to be involved in their child's education. The parent population is very diverse and the majority of our parents do not speak English as their first language. Some of the parents speak little to no English and have expressed how they do not know how to help their child, due to the language barrier. Some of our immigrant families may come with the ability to speak English, but their understanding of American culture is limited. When families arrive from other countries and cultures, we work with them to support their child’s transition to the new school setting. PS 281 teachers facilitate ten parent workshops throughout the year to support understanding of grade level curriculum and what parents can do to support their child at home. Some topics include: literacy, math, developing strong social-emotional skills, developing language, and positive discipline. Parents are notified of these events through e-mail invitations, the River Reader (school e-newsletter), and paper invites sent home in their child’s backpack. Translations and interpreters are available upon request. At the end of the school year (May 2018) and the beginning of the new school year (September 2018), parents are asked to give feedback during Parent-Teacher nights in the form of a survey. Surveys are analyzed to determine which workshops were most successful and which are requested for the upcoming year. Parents requested more workshops about curriculum and instruction and ways they can help their children at home. All parent workshops are held on Parent Engagement Tuesdays between 7:50am - 8:30 am. September 25, 2018 How to support our newest ELLs transition to school? Facilitated by Guidance Counselor. October 16, 2018 What does the early reading process look like for ELLs? Co-facilitated by Kindergarten teachers and ENL Specialist December 11, 2018 What does the early writing process look like for ELLs? Facilitated by ENL Specialist February 12, 2019 Strengthening Academic Language at Home and School. Facilitated by ENL Specialist March 5, 2019 How to help your 3-5th grade child prepare for the NYS ELA and Mathematics examinations. Co facilitated by 3-5th grade Teachers and ENL teacher June 18, 2019 How to Prevent the Summer Slide? Facilitated by ENL Specialist The Parent Engagement Workshops are at no cost to Title III, however alternate funding for interpretation/translation may be used. 5 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for Direct Instruction: 5 teachers x 30 weeks x 1 hour/week x $60.65 = $ 9097.50 Per session for professional development: 5 teachers x 2 hours x $60.65 = $606.50 Per session for parent engagement: 2 teachers x 2 sessions x 1 hour x $60.65 = $242.60 N/A Annual subscription renewal to Reading A-Z Plus ELL Resources ($224.95); Benchmark Education's Readers Theater to support Title 3 instructional program ($904.00); Up the Ladder Supplemental Writing Curriculum for students in Grades 3-5 ($95.00 x 3 kits); The remaining amount ($58.05) will be used on general supplies for the program. n/a n/a Parental Involvement - materials and supplies for parent workshops; breakfast and refreshments for morning workshops n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $9946.60  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff N/A $1472.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other 0 0 $947.40 TOTAL $12,366.00 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name The River School Borough Manhattan School Number 281 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jessica Orleans Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Donna Chin Teacher/Subject Area Kristin Boyar Teacher/Subject Area Amy Morse Related-Service Provider Marissa Boruchow Superintendent Bonnie LaBoy Assistant Principal Daria Agosta Coach N/A School Counselor Karen Berman Parent David Silva Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member Lisa Velazquez Other (Name and Title) Ellen Obrien Issing, Secretary C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 181 7 Total number of ELLs 24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.26%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The River School uses formal and informal assessments to evaluate the early literacy skills of our English Language Learners (ELLs). The formal assessment used for reading is the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark Assessment. This assessment provides teachers with information about students’ abilities to decode and comprehend texts on a leveled continuum. The assessments also measure a variety of other literacy skills including: concepts about print, letter identification, high frequency word recognition, and spelling skills. The teachers also use rubrics aligned to the Common Core Standards to evaluate the students' literacy and math skills. The English as a New Language (ENL) and classroom teachers use the data to measure whether students are at, below, or above grade level and they use the data to drive the instructional planning for our ELLs. Teachers also conduct informal assessments including: anecdotal notes, reading and writing conferences, formative 8  assessments, writing samples, etc. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The Fountas and Pinnell formal reading assessments are given a minimum of three times a year as scheduled across the annual school calendar (October, February, and May). This data is recorded and shared with all teachers on a school-wide F&P data tracker on Google Drive. The students are also given the Citywide Performance Math Tasks twice a year, once at the beginning of the year and once at the end of the year. All teachers use informal assessments throughout the school day, such as anecdotals, reading and writing conferences, and writing samples which are used to inform day to day instruction. Teachers use prep periods and the weekly "other professional work" time to analyze the data and adjust their instructional plans for ELLs. Teachers are also given one period a week to collect data (conduct assessments), progress monitor and pull small groups for instruction. Additionally, time has been dedicated to curriculum planning for ELLs during weekly professional development sessions on Mondays during a Fall and Spring time Professional Learning Community (PLC) cycle. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The New York State Identification Test for ELLs (NYSITELL) and New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) are used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. For incoming new ELL students, the NYSITELL is used as a baseline to inform the proficiency level of the students. Later on in the year, the NYSESLAT is used to identify students' progress and areas of need. For returning ELL students, the NYSESLAT is used as a baseline to not only inform the language proficiency levels of the students, but also informs the progress and areas of need in the four specific modalities (reading, writing, listening, speaking). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the baseline data for all ELLs is gathered, whether from NYSITELL or NYSESLAT, teachers address the needs of the student based on expectations set by school, city and state-wide standards (Common Core Learning Standards). Teachers have been trained and continue to receive on-going ENL training around the expected language behaviors of ELLs based on language proficiency. To address interventions, teachers and service providers meet regularly to analyze data and formulate next steps for students. With this data, teachers plan small groups based on student needs and focus skills. Cross-curricular and cross-grade professional development sessions provide teachers with strategies, intervention ideas, and norms to address the needs of ELLs and all learners. Classroom teachers and ENL teacher work closely together to deliver Tier 1 and Tier 2 instruction using the integrative co-teaching model. When students are unresponsive to Tier 1 and Tier 2 classroom interventions, teachers complete a PPT/SIT (Pupil Personnel Team/Student Intervention Team) referral form. Next, classroom teachers present about this student to the team. The team, comprised of a social worker, principal, speech therapist, occupational therapist, school psychologist, ENL teacher, and special education teacher, provides input and ideas to help further support this student. Teachers then implement strategies and track progress over a period of 6-8 weeks. Teachers return to PPT/SIT to report progress, given the proposed interventions. At-risk services are provided by available related service providers to address further student needs when applicable. When students are unresponsive to proposed interventions and at-risk services, a special education referral may be explored. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The teachers at The River School collect a wide range of data to help assess the needs of the students. This data includes the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores, the benchmark assessments at the beginning/ middle/ and end of the year (reading, writing, math), and running records about each student's growth in all four modalities of English language acquisition (reading, writing, speaking, and listening). The teachers use the data to drive their core-instruction, both in the classroom and in the ENL 9 classroom. When any student, including ELLs, begin to struggle during Tier 1 core-instruction, measures are taken to provide additional small group tier 2 and/or tier 3 supports outside of the classroom. Classroom teachers are supported along the way with collaboration and in consultation of the ENL teacher and other specialists. The River School places a strong emphasis on regular, informal and formative assessments along with the formal standardized assessments. This allows teachers the opportunity to analyze students' needs and develop appropriate academic plans for them. In the ENL classroom, the educator assesses oral language development through recorded observations of students interacting with peers during small group activities, paired work, conferences, and classroom discussions. The teachers use the data gathered to build oral language scaffolds that focus on both social English and academic English. To address guidance for data analysis and instruction, a Response to Intervention framework is used. Teachers and service providers meet regularly to analyze data and formulate next steps for students. With this data, teachers plan small groups based on student needs and focus skills. Cross-curricular and cross-grade professional development sessions provide teachers with strategies, intervention ideas, and norms to address the needs of ELLs and all learners. Classroom teachers and ENL teacher work closely together to deliver Tier 1 and Tier 2 instruction using the integrative co-teaching model. When students are unresponsive to Tier 1 and Tier 2 classroom interventions, teachers complete a PPT/SIT (Pupil Personnel Team/Student Intervention Team) referral form. Next, classroom teachers present about this student to the team. The team, comprised of a social worker, principal, speech therapist, occupational therapist, school psychologist, ENL teacher, and special education teacher, provides input and ideas to help further support this student. Teachers then implement strategies and track progress over a period of 6-8 weeks. Teachers return to PPT/SIT to report progress, given the proposed interventions. At-risk services are provided by available related service providers to address further student needs when applicable. When students are unresponsive to proposed interventions and at-risk services, a special education referral may be explored. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL data indicates that most of our incoming Kindergarten and 1st grade ELLs had varying levels of langauge proficiency. 23% of the kindergarten ELLs are speaking English at the entering level and 7.5% are speaking at the emerging level. 7.5% of the kindergarten ELLs are at the transitioning and 62% are at the expanding levels. In first and second grade, there are 25% of the students at the entering level. 75% of the students are at the transitioning and expanding levels. 95% of ELLs made at least 1 level of progress in the 2015-16 school year as shown on the NYSESLAT. There were 17 students out of 25 total ELLs passed the NYSESLAT in the previous spring and are now categorized as "commanding" or former ELLs. This data indicates that the students are making progress throughout the year and their English proficiency levels have improved. All teachers continually monitor the ELLs' progress and examine the NYSESLAT scores in the spring/summer to further assess the progress of the students. Close examination of student performance on each modality within the NYSESLAT is done to determine the areas in which students may need additional support whether reading, writing, listening or speaking. This data also informs the way in which students are grouped for instruction. For the small percentage of students who did not show any progress as demonstrated by the NYSESLAT (1 of 25 students), the ENL teacher and classroom teachers work closely during the year to support the child with Tier 1 and 2 interventions. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In September, the ENL teacher gathers the NYSESLAT data and disseminates the information to classroom teachers. Teachers note the amount of progress ELLs have made and adjust their plans accordingly. Throughout the year, teachers receive weekly professional development throughout the year on ENL topics to support the work necessary for teachers to make adjustments to their programs. Each school year, teachers are given training on the expected language and behaviors of students at the five language proficiencies and supportive modifications to differentiate instruction. Additionally, the ENL teacher works closely with classroom teachers to communicate, collaborate and plan for both stand-alone ENL and the integrative co-teaching model of ENL. This teacher to teacher communication and collaboration is essential in disseminating data and working together to adjust our program. 0  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL program at The River School is a combination of push-in and pull-out instruction. ELLs are placed in classes heterogeneously. As per CR Part 154.2 all of our entering and emerging students are provided with 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction. The entering and emerging students are receiving 180 minutes of stand alone instruction and 180 minutes of integrated instruction. The emerging students have some flexibility with 90 minutes of the stand alone instruction which often transitions to an additional 90 minutes of integrated instruction as the school year progresses. The kindergarten entering and emerging students are grouped together for four 45 minute sessions a week. For the integrated instruction, the ENL teacher pushes into each classroom for a total of 180 minutes. The first and second grade entering and emerging students are grouped together for the stand alone instruction. The transitioning and expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. The transitioning kindergartners from the different classes are grouped together for the 90 min. of stand alone instruction. The first and second grade transitioning students receive 90 min. of integrated instruction in their classrooms. The remaining 90 min. are flexible. The ENL teacher along with the classroom teachers determine if the students will receive the rest of the time as stand alone and/or integrated instruction. This varies from week to week depending on the needs of the students and the lessons that are being taught. The expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated instruction. The ENL teacher pushes into each of the classrooms with expanding students for the integrated instruction. The former ELLs are provided with 90 minutes per week of integrated instruction. The integrated instruction involves co-teaching with the classroom teacher and providing scaffolding for ELLs. The teachers often utilize that time for station or parallel teaching. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teachers to discuss particular students’ needs. The ENL teacher discusses units of study in reading, writing, science and social studies to align with the classroom teacher’s instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A We do not have this program. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A We do not have this program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? For the 2016-2017 school year, students at the entering and emerging levels receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. These students are pulled out of their classroom to receive ENL instruction in a separate classroom four days a week for 45 minute sessions, and the ENL teacher pushes into their regular classrooms for integrated instruction four 45 minute sessions a day, depending on the class. The transitioning students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction a week. 90 min. are designated as integrated instruction where the ENL teacher pushes into the classroom two 45 minute periods a week. The ENL teacher and the classroom teachers meet and discuss how the remaining 90 minutes will be used. It is a combination of stand alone and integrated instruction based on the needs of the students. The expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated instruction in the classroom. The former ELLs receive at least 90 minutes of support in the classroom. The 1  integrated ENL instruction is in core content areas including ELA, math, and social studies. The River School does not provide Home Language Arts as a separate class. Instead, the ENL teacher provides home language support to newly arrived students, with no English background, through a variety of ENL scaffolds and strategies including visuals, Total Physical Response, picture dictionaries as well as technology, to assist in their learning. In our ENL program, 25% of home language support is given mostly through use of strategic grouping, use of bilingual glossaries/dictionaries and technology (online translators, websites, etc.). Since the majority of our ELL students began school in NYC in kindergarten, their reading and writing skills in their home language are limited. The ELLs at The River School speak over 20 different home languages. Therefore, Home Language Arts classes are not applicable, because we do not have the student population to warrant it. However, students who speak the same home language often will support each other by translating for each other as needed. Students are grouped strategically throughout the year to support their home language as they make the transition to learning English. Special Education students, who do not speak English and require a paraprofessional, will be provided with a bilingual paraprofessional if one is available. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL program at The River School follows a thematic unit as its instructional approach. Thematic units are based on the Science and Social Studies Standards and The Next Generation Science Standards, as well as the Reading and Writing Common Core Learning Standards. Using these content areas as a base for ENL instruction, provides access to English language development for ELLs at all language levels. All classrooms utilize visual icons and Total Physical Response (TPR) while introducing Content and Language objectives for lessons. All staff utilize visuals and picture vocabulary dictionaries for the units of study in social studies and science to ensure the content is accessible to the ELLs. Instructional time is divided so that time is spent on specific math, science, social studies language, as well as general English development. Students learn vocabulary and language structures that scaffold what they are doing in their mainstream classrooms. They also learn language acquisition strategies that help them across the content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? After students complete the NYSITELL, the Spanish Lab is administered to Spanish speaking students. This allows the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher to gauge what level the Spanish speaking students are at academically in their home language. When applicable or necessary, teachers can get assessments and exams translated into a child's home language and/or an interpreter can be used. We constantly seek additional ways to assess home language proficiency especially for our ELLs who speak languages other than the ones offered by the New York City Department of Education's Office of Translation and Interpretation unit. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Through the pull-out and push-in ENL program at The River School, instruction is differentiated based on the language proficiency levels and needs of the students. a. Currently there are no SIFE students at The River School. However, if a SIFE student enrolls, s/he will be interviewed 2  using the SIFE questionnaire. The PPT and LAP team will assign all teachers who work with the student to collect data and will then meet to determine which services are needed to support the child's needs. b. Most of our students are newcomers who have been in the US Schools for less than three years and are provided with ENL services. For newcomers we use a variety of strategies to differentiate lessons to include students of different language levels who are in the same class. We pair the newcomer ELL up with a buddy who acts as a touchstone throughout the day as he or she guides the ELL through daily routines. Where possible, this buddy partner shares the same home language and we allow native language use when it aids instruction. Whenever possible, The River School utilizes pictorial representations. Additionally, the ENL teacher looks for opportunities for students to share experiences and information from their own culture and heritage. When planning an activity or unit, we focus on instructing our lowest level ELLs and focus on identifying the key elements that all students must know in order to go on. The ENL and classroom teachers also build opportunities into the day to preteach, review, and spiral instruction. Stations and centers play a major role in instruction. The classroom teachers and the ENL teacher utilize co-teaching models (station teaching, parallel teaching, flip-flop) as much as possible, which allows the ELLs to receive more support in the smaller group settings. This enables the teachers to constantly be assessing the understanding of the students and differentiating the instruction/ task/ product to better meet the needs of newcomer students. c. The River School currently has very few ELLs who have been receiving ENL services for 4 to 6 years or long-term ELLs, as it is a new school just servicing kindergarten through 3rd grade. However, as we grow to fourth and fifth grades in the next two years, we anticipate that the number of developing ELLs may grow. In the 2016-17 year, we have one student who fits this description. In order to ensure differentiated instruction for this subgroup, we employ the integrated instructional model where the classroom teacher and ENL teacher partner to differentiate core instruction. This is done mostly through the parallel teaching or station teaching model so that these students are given more support and practice with language and content in a smaller group setting. The ENL and classroom teachers are constantly assessing students' understanding of material and continue to build opportunities into the day to preteach, review, and spiral instruction. On-going efforts are made to differentiate instruction, tasks, and/or products to best meet the needs of developing ELLs. d. The former ELLs at The River School receive 90 min. per week of integrated instruction. The ENL teacher pushes into the classroom to support and co-teach the grade level content curriculum. Like the efforts made for developing students, the ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teacher to ensure that these students can access classroom material that is presented. Differentiation of instruction is usually done by conducting station teaching, parallel teaching or small groups. Former Ells are also eligible for ELL testing accommodations for up to two years after they test out, as per CR Part 154.2. Given that the 2016-17 year was the first year of third graders taking the New York State Assessments, we have yet to see whether students will test out of ENL services through an alternate method. As per CR Part 154.2, students may exit ENL services by testing Commanding level on the NYSESLAT or by testing level 3 on the New York State English Language Arts (ELA) assessment and testing at the expanding level on the NYSESLAT. If at a future date we have students who exit the ENL program in differing ways, we will examine the data and make appropriate decisions for differentiation. For instance, a child who tests out of ENL because s/he receives "commanding," on the NYSESLAT yet receives a score of level 2 or below on the ELA, would likely need heavier support with building vocabulary, reading and writing. However, a student who scores a level 3 or 4 on the ELA and "expanding" on the NYSESLAT would likely need more work in content language support, perhaps in other content area such as math, science or social studies. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teacher and classroom teachers of ELL-SWDs use instructional strategies and grade-level materials to provide students with access to academic content and guide students in accelerating English language development. They use content and language objectives, vocabulary charts, instructional charts, word walls, picture dictionaries, picture vocabulary dictionaries, visuals, songs, manipulatives, graphic organizers, thinking maps, vocabulary gradient charts, movements, realia, digital books, videos, leveled texts, sentence starters, technology programs and applications (Raz-kids, Starfall, Mathletics, etc.) brainstorm lists, etc. 3  Given the school's instructional focus of speaking and listening, the ENL teacher and classroom teacher regularly implement an accountable talk rubric to promote English language acquisition. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers utilize small group instruction, station teaching, differentiated activities, individual and small group conferences, pre-teaching, and remedial reviews to help meet the needs of all the levels of the students in the class. The students have access to online bilingual dictionaries and online translation. Teachers help families to form connections with other families who speak the same home language to ensure that home-school communication is consistent. Teachers of ELL-SWDs will follow the student's IEP in regards to academic and language goals for individual students and mandated services that these students are obligated to receive. These outside services and programs, such as speech, counseling, occupational therapy, special education teacher support services (SETSS), integrated co-teaching, and physical therapy provide students with additional academic support. Classroom teachers and service providers discuss with one another the student’s progress and continued needs. Classroom teachers differentiate within their classroom, creating small groups to target specific student’s academic and language needs. To build academic content, teachers offer students grade appropriate content at their reading level. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs, The River School offers service providers to meet at the beginning of the school year to plan out a schedule. If the ELL-SWD receives more than one service, it is important that all service providers (OT, PT, speech, guidance, SETSS and ENL) meet to discuss which students will be pulled out on what days and times. This allows all service providers to rearrange scheduling to ensure that one particular student is not pulled out of class too often in one day. Additionally, teachers and service providers collaborate to ensure that students are supported during academic times that would enable them to make the maximum amount of progress in the least restrictive environment. Service providers, including the ENL teacher, attend IEP meetings in order to determine and plan for helping ELL-SWD achieve their IEP and English acquisition goals. As often as possible, service providers work together to provide necessary supports. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The River School has set up intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, science and social studies. Special needs students who are not proficient in English are provided with instructional supports as defined in their IEPs. Guided reading groups are conducted during reading workshop. This allows homogenous grouping of students who need to work on specific skills and/ or concepts. The teachers use Fundations for the word study program. This systematic program allows ELLs to grasp the literacy concepts being taught. This program focuses on phonemic awareness, phonics/ word study, reading fluency, vocabulary, comprehension strategies, handwriting, and spelling. The Sounds in Motion curriculum is used as a supplementary curriculum for the kindergarteners and entering and emerging 1 st and 2 nd graders who do not know the letters and the sounds associated with them. This curriculum is useful for helping children improve skills in: listening, phonemic awareness, articulation, discrimination of speech sounds, auditory processing, and vocabulary development. The ENL teacher pushes into the classrooms and provides small group instruction and support for all ELLs. The ENL teacher communicates with all students and families prior to the summer break to ensure learning needs are 4  supported throughout the summer. This includes books to take home, information on summer programs and continuation of writing in their student journals. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As an improvement plan for the upcoming school year, The River School will provide targeted support to ELLs during small group instruction. Additionally, teachers will continue to develop the work around integrating Content and Language objectives for the upcoming school year. The River School is considering utilizing more digital literacy in order to motivate and engage students, especially during reading and writing workshops. RAZ-kids/Reading A-Z, another supplementary resource for ELL students, gives students access to listen and read leveled and decodable books to extend their learning beyond the classroom. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We currently do not have a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs and activities. They are not restricted from participating in anything. ELLs and their families are offered translation and interpretation services with regard to school activities- translation of curriculum, parent-teacher meetings, PTA meetings, school-wide events, afterschool programs, and community activities. ELLs also receive support through instructional materials. In the ENL classroom, ELLs are provided with books and picture dictionaries, literature at various levels, a document camera and a SmartBoard. They have the opportunity to use computers, SmartBoards and engage in computer-based literacy and vocabulary activities. Fliers, invitations, letters and paperwork are translated into the preferred languages as requested at the beginning of the year. Over-the-phone interpreters are always available for parents to gather information and get questions answered. The school offers science, music, art with Studio in the School, field trips, and other interactive activities. All of the students participate in these activities. Throughout the school year ELLs in the 2nd and 3rd grades are offered the River Rise after school program where they can receive additional targeted small group instruction in English and Math. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The teachers use an assortment of instructional programs, methods and strategies to support ELLs. Students are provided with other services (speech, PT, OT, SETSS, ICT, counseling) when appropriate. Students have access to both classroom and school libraries, as well as leveled and non-leveled (grouped by subject) books in the ELL classroom. The libraries consist of both fiction and nonfiction texts that range in reading levels. . Classroom and ENL teachers try to incorporate any visuals, cultural/ language connections and texts, and realia as much as possible. The students have access to electronic bilingual dictionaries and books. The teachers try to incorporate any visuals, cultural/ language connections and texts, and realia as much as possible. Teachers provide opportunities for students to utilize interactive technological programs to advance their learning and English-language acquisition, some of which include Raz-Kids reading, Starfall Phonics and Mathletics math program. The Raz-Kids program allows ELLs to access leveled and decodable books from any computer, in school or at home. The students and teachers use technology throughout the school, in the form of SmartBoards, computers, cameras, CD players (listening centers) and document cameras. ELL students utilize audiobooks, e-Books, music and videos, computer programs, and language learning websites (in class and at home). The ENL teacher informs parents about helpful websites via the school website and at meetings. 5  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The River School does not have a DL or TBE program. In the ENL program, the ELLs receive home language support through visuals, board books, and picture dictionaries. Realia and connections to the students' cultures and languages are made as often as possible. In our ENL program, 25% of home language support is given mostly through use of strategic grouping, use of bilingual glossaries/dictionaries and technology (online translators, websites, etc.). Since the majority of our ELL students began school in NYC in kindergarten, their reading and writing skills in their home language are limited. The ELLs at The River School speak over 20 different home languages. Students who speak the same home language often will support each other by translating for each other as needed. Students are grouped strategically throughout the year to support their home language as they make the transition to learning English. ELLs with special needs will receive home language support through a bilingual paraprofessional if one is available. Bilingual staff will also offer support to students when applicable. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The materials and scaffolds coincide with the grade level content that is being taught. The curriculum is age appropriate and the teachers utilize materials that are age appropriate, as evidenced by the age ratings on the material. Required services and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels by aligning with the Common Core Standards. The ENL teacher regularly has professional development sessions with teachers of all grades to ensure that the ELL work being done is supporting what is going on in the general education classrooms. When our ELLs reach fifth grade, which they have not yet, the school guidance counselor will provide ELLs with support as they transition from elementary to middle school. The school counselor provides parents and students with information on the different middle schools that the student can apply to. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The Spectrum School (P94 in D75) and a District 2 Pre-K Center are currently co-located at the River School. The principal of The River School works with the other programs in our building to coordinate and schedule the use of shared spaces. These shared spaces include: the gymnasium/auditorium, the cafeteria, outdoor play spaces and library. ELLs at The River School have access to all shared spaces as scheduled by the principal. ELLs also have access as needed to the support of a full time nurse, full time speech therapist, and other part-time service providers: guidance counselor, occupational therapists, and physical therapists. When the need for bilingual supports arise throughout the year, The River School has benefited in coordinating help from support staff at the other programs. For example, one of the Mandarin speaking paraprofessionals from The Spectrum School helped the ENL teacher administer the Gifted and Talented test to one of our newcomer ELLs in Chinese. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the first day of school, The River School sends out letters welcoming new parents to our school. These newsletters are translated for parents of ELLs. We host a "Kickoff to Kindergarten" event before school starts so the children and families feel a little more comfortable on the first day. The families participate in interactive activities to get to know the other families in the class. They are also given important logistical information (in their preferred language). This event gives families the opportunity to meet the principal and the teachers in the school. Teachers and school officials provide parents with the names and contact information of parents who speak the same language. The school hosts a Curriculum Night in September and another informational event in the middle of the year. The entire staff participates in these activities. New ELL families are invited to the Parent Orientation, where they have the chance to ask any questions they may have. Throughout the year, various staff members facilitate parent workshops. Parents can request an interpreter to be present at any event or meeting. Phone interpretation services are utilized throughout the year during parent-teacher conferences, IEP meetings and other parent meetings as needed. 6  New ELLs who are enrolled throughout the year are given individual and small group support from the ENL teacher, the classroom teacher(s), the principal, the guidance counselor, and the teacher aides. The new ELLs are paired up with students in the class to help foster a smooth transition and help them learn about their new school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, The River School does not offer foreign language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The River School does not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The common branch teachers, special education teachers, principal, and secretaries receive professional development (PD) on ELL related issues throughout the year. The River School works with ELL instructional leads from the Manhattan Field Support Center (MFSC) to plan and facilitate regular workshops to support all teachers of ELLs in our school. Beginning in 2015, the school began professional learning cycles (PLC) around how to best support our ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. In 2017, this work was highlighted at the Manhattan PLO Expo. In the 2016-17 year, the staff PLC focused on teaching and developing academic vocabulary through content and language objectives. A fall and spring cycle of Monday PDs were dedicated to this work. In addition, the ELL instructional lead from MFSC has worked closely with the ENL teacher and classroom teachers to do job-embedded coaching to support the ELL PD initiatives that have been put in place in the last couple years. Continued work around ELL related topics such as the stages of language acquisition, engaging ELLs in the classroom, differentiating instruction/ activities/ end products for ELLs, working with newcomers, vocabulary development, creating content and language objectives, and supporting parents of ELLs will be addressed at future PLC cycles. The ENL teacher attends and participates in ELL focused professional development sessions given by staff developers from the Teachers College Reading Writing Project at Columbia University. The ENL teacher also attends ELL related professional development workshops through the MFSC and the Office of English Language Learners. Throughout the year, in house professional development occurs as the ENL teacher works one-on-one with classroom teachers, discussing strategies and supports for specific ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 7  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The staff will participate in a 6-8 week professional development cycle on supporting ELLs in the classroom. This six-eight week cycle will occur on Monday afternoons during the regularly scheduled PD time. All records of attendance will be kept on file in the school. This training is facilitated by the ENL teacher, classroom teachers with support from ELL instructional lead from MFSC and consists of one-on-one meetings, job embedded coaching and workshops. The topics center around working with ELLs, understanding language acquisition, academic vocabulary instruction and scaffolds and strategies teachers can use in the classroom to support ELL and all student learning. The ENL teacher will fulfill the required amount of hours by attending district and borough ENL PD workshops, TCRWP ENL calendar days and ENL Specialty Group, and other pertinent professional development experiences that arise. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Throughout the year, there is designated time on Tuesdays for parent engagement. This is a time when parents and teachers can meet to discuss a student's strengths, weaknesses, goals, achievements, concerns, questions, etc. This information is relayed to all parents at the beginning and throughout the year. Official parent/ teacher conferences occur in November and March. This gives the parents and teachers the opportunity to come together as a group to discuss the student's progress and next steps. At approximately mid-end year, the ENL teacher will schedule the required individual annual meetings with the parents. Before the meeting, the ENL instructor will check-in with the classroom teachers to discuss any areas that he/she feels should be highlighted during the meeting. During the annual meeting, all goals, progress, assessment results, and continued needs in all content areas will be discussed. An interpreter will be available, or accessed through the Language Line during the meeting if necessary. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of all students, including ELLs, are given the opportunity to be directly involved in their child’s learning. The last Friday of every month is Family Friday at The River School. On Family Fridays, parents are welcome to join their children in their classrooms to participate in their child’s academic growth and development. The ENL teacher rotates around to welcome the families of ELLs during Family Friday events. Parents are invited to numerous PTA activities such as a potlucks, movie night, Valentine's Dance, Spring auction, International Night, and Family Day. All parents that request interpretation for school events are provided with an interpreter. These interpreters are often members of the school community that speak the language. In the event that we have a language that is not available for interpretation by in-house staff, The River School will reach out to parent volunteers and/or use interpretation support from the Language Line. There are also many volunteer opportunities for the parents to help in the school. They can work in the library, be a mystery reader in the classroom, help with class projects, help chaperone field trips, aid in the preparation of materials, and/or take on the role of a class parent. These opportunities allow the parents to become a stronger member of our school community and allows them to better understand the philosophy of the school and the education their child is receiving. 8  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jessica Orleans, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The River School School DBN: 02M281 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jessica Orleans Title Principal N/A N/A Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Donna Chin ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A Kristin Boyer Amy Morse N/A N/A Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Karen Berman School Counselor Bonnie LaBoy N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Ellen Obrien Issing Other Secretary Meredith Wilk Other Teacher N/A Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 06/30/2017 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M281 School Name: The River School Superintendent: Bonnie LaBoy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No English as a New Language Teacher Yes Yes Donna Chin * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school’s written and oral language preferences and needs are determined through the information gathered from Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), ATS reports - RCPL and RAPL, blue emergency cards, and the DOE's Language Preference Letter. Each year, the ENL teacher takes the data from the HLIS surveys and the DOE's Language Preference Letter to determine which language groups are represented at our school. This year we have 23 different languages represented (Arabic, Japanese, Spanish, Korean, Armenian, Georgian, Russian, Nepali, Hindi, Tagalog, Hebrew, Greek, Malay, Finish, Farsi/Dari, Dzongkha, Portuguese, French, Sepedi/Sesotho, Serbo-Croatian, German, Chinese and English). Upon registration, if parents are unable to speak English, an interpreter is used, in person or via phone (Language Line), to assist the parents in answering any questions they may have about registration. During registration, the school is also able to determine the language of communication the parents prefer. Written and oral translation services will be provided if the parents state that they prefer school information documents in their home language. If requested, official Department of 2  Education documents, school events fliers, calendars, and student narrative reports will be translated into the preferred language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral CHINESE ANY HATIAN CREOLE JAPANESE MANDARIN ENGLISH 363 SPANISH 6 VIETNAMESE 1 CHINESE ANY 9 HATIAN CREOLE 1 JAPANESE 1 MANDARIN 0 ENGLISH 363 SPANISH 6 VIETNAMESE 1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 3  At this current time, we do not have any parent preferred languages represented at 10% or more. However, it should be noted many families at our school do speak a language other than English at home, yet one member of their family may speak English. Most often it is the English speaking parent that registers their child. However, on a daily basis we may interface with other family members, i.e. grandparents, other spouse, who may not speak English. Therefore, the data culled from the RAPL is not completely representative of the whole family needs. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families School-created Progress Reports 3 times a year (November 12, March 11, June 17) plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All formal Department of Education documents, school-wide reports and notices are translated and distributed to families who indicate that they prefer a language other than English. The Department of Education translation unit is used to translate school-wide non-student sensitive/specific notices and documents. These documents are sent at least 2 weeks in advanced to the 4  translation and interpretation unit for translation into one of the 9 languages available. For families who indicate a language other than the 9 available, measures are taken to either set up a face-to-face meeting with interpretation by staff or the Language Line. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Welcome back to school - Orientation Curriculum Night Parent workshops Parent Teacher Conferences Family Friday events plan to provide interpretation service(s)? All staff members are trained and notified in September how to use the translation and interpretation services available to them. If interpretation is needed during face to face September September On-going throughout the year 5  2-3 times a year On-going throughout the year meetings, the 800-Language Line number is used to provide interpretation in over 200 languages. For meetings in a group format, the school coordinates with the families to ensure access to the information given is available. Sometimes this interpretation is conducted through other parent volunteers who speak the same language, or families are given printed material in their preferred language and/or met with one-on-one with the interpretive assistance from one of the Language Line interpreters. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, staff members will contact all families using information on the emergency Blue Cards to communicate the plan for safety. Depending on the nature of the emergency, a mass email will be sent to all River School families to communicate the plan for safety. To specifically communicate with our limited-English-6  proficient families, we will utilize the Language Line translation service to notify them of any school emergencies. We will create an emergency plan where teachers are designated languages and families to call using Language Line. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Each school year, the Language Access Coordinator (LAC) will conduct training for all staff on the policies and procedures around providing our families language access to the information that we give and send out throughout the year. Staff members are surveyed for their language abilities and are also notified of children in their classes whose families have indicated a preferred language other than English. Staff is also trained in how to access support for interpretation and translation for families who indicate a preferred language other than English. For non-student specific/sensitive documents, request forms for the translation unit are given out and used to make translation requests into up to 9 of the offered languages. For face-to-face interpretation, a staff member or the Language Line is used for interpretation support. The LAC offers initial support for staff in their first time making translation requests and/or calling the Language Line. If new staff members are hired during the year, the LAC will train them as they come on board. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Translation and oral interpretation services are provided by the Department of Education’s Translation and Interpretation Unit. When families are greeted at The River School, signs are posted in the entrance and in the main office indicating the availability of interpretation and translation services. Additionally, office staff have been trained to let families know that if their family that needs oral interpretation, we are able to provide these services. Families that need face-to-face interpretation are assisted by available bilingual staff, or by assistance from the Language Line. These services are provided during parent-teacher conferences, IEP meetings, initial orientation for parents of ELLs, and anytime the parent schedules an appointment requesting a translator. Where the city-wide notices and most ENL compliance notices/brochures are available in the 9 translated languages, we are able to send those out as needed. However, if there is a need to communicate in a language other than the 9 provided by the DOE, we will use an online translator or arrange for a face-to-face meeting with interpretation provided by the Language Line. 7  Additionally, all staff including classroom teachers are trained in use of the translation and interpretation services provided by the Department of Educations Translation and Interpretation unit. Throughout the year, teachers communicate with their families assuring language access to those with limited-English proficiencies. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent feedback surveys are given throughout the year to gather information on how the limited-English-proficient parents feel about the language services they receive. In addition, formal and informal meetings with all families are conducted throughout the year. On going communication between the LAC, staff, teachers, and principal ensures that The River School gathers feedback regarding the language services we have provided and continues to work to create an improved plan for the future. 8 
