 01M332 School Name: UNIVERSITY NEIGHBORHOOD MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: LAURA PEYNADO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information University Neighborhood Middle School blank 6,7,8 School Number (DBN): 01M332 220 Henry Street, New York, NY 10002 212-267-5701 212-349-8224 Phone Number: Fatima Rodriguez Fax: Email Address: f.rodriguez@unmslearns.net School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 01 Superintendent’s Office Address: Laura Peynado-Castro Gus Marcellus Chris Vereneand Gloria Collazo Kirsten Youngren DrunildaPena N/A Hughes Sygney District Information Carry Chan Superintendent: 166 Essex Street, NY, NY 10002 cchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-353-2948 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 W 7 th Ave, NY, NY 10001 ychu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Laura Peynado-Castro Gustaveson Marcellus Gloria Collazo/Chris Verene FatimaRodriguez Gus Marcellus Moira Brennan Kirsten Youngren *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Elected UFT Elected Parent Elected Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Barbara Williams Lenny Russo John Miller Joseph Cimaglia FrankaWarner Elected Parent Elected Parent Elected UFT ElectedUFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The UNMS experience is built upon the vision and mission that developing the whole child into young adulthood encompasses trust, consistency, achievement, respect, empathy and shared responsibility. We realize living in the urban landscape requires understanding, thoughtfulness and care. A true learning community is built by all the facets of our students experiences, growth and development. Our Mission: The mission of University Neighborhood Middle School is to provide a nurturing educational   experience for students of the Lower East Side, that helps them develop a positive self-image, achieve academic and social growth, and enables them to enter and succeed in an academically rigorous high school. Our Vision: UNMS students will become independent and adaptive learners who make a meaningful impact on our increasingly global society and have the skills and character to continually develop and achieve meaningful goals. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The University Neighborhood Middle School (UNMS) instructional philosophy and definition of academic rigor is rooted in the belief that all students learn best when they feel safe, inspired, and challenged to make meaning as they are expected to apply skills to new situations and synthesize their own experiences as they develop a clearer understanding of themselves and the world. At UNMS, This year our focus in on engagement. The EQ for the year is How do we engage all students in learning?" All students at UNMS benefit from an education that recognizes their specific instructional, social and emotional needs, and views their native languages and cultures as valuable resources. UNMS creates a climate for learning, empowering students to take greater responsibility for their education, sets high expectations for each individual and provides support systems that foster student achievement. Students learn the value of teamwork as participants in a vibrant collaboration among their peers and partnerships with community based organizations and institutions like NYU. Through a rigorous and supportive program, students gain the confidence and skills that they need to become college and career ready, lifelong learners and productive members of society. At UNMS, we continue to revise our curriculum, basing our considerations on interdisciplinary, vertical, and horizontal alignment to ensure that academic goals, tasks, and student outcomes are aligned. In 2015-2016 school year we began exploring ways to make our curriculum more culturally relevant. In the 2016-2017 school year we engaged in focused professional learning work that supports this need in a much more intentional way. We focused deeply on cultural relevant pedagogy and micro-aggression's thorough our NYU PD strand and our Circles work. For the 2017-2018 school year we will dive even deeper into this work and embed it not only in circles work with adults but also through grade level circle planning,IV and triad book groups. We are going to engage our staff in in school Instructional Rounds, based on the researched based work. The focus on instructional effectiveness is always present in the teaming that occurs at UNMS. Teachers use multiple data sources, including formative assessments (examples include conferencing notes, teacher observations, daily tasks and low-stakes assessments, exit slips, scripted notes of student discussions) and summative assessments (unit tests and performance tasks) to assess their lesson’s and unit’s effectiveness and to inform interventions inside and outside the classroom (enrichment periods, after school and/or tutoring sessions as determined by teachers and individual students). Mastery of standards are tracked using an online tool called Jump Rope. All teachers meet in content teams to plan and assess unit and lesson alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) using student data and samples of student work. Every team has a team member who is certified in Special Education and ESL. Resources and Universal Design Language (UDL) strategies are shared at this time to maximize student access to learning. 90% of returning teachers received training in Universal Design for Learning Practices. For staff members who are new to the school and did not receive UDL training, these practices are built into their observation cycles. They are expected to reflect on UDL practices and receive feedback that aligns to those practices. r in addition to all teachers being equipped to design lessons using UDL practices, our school has been 0  chosen to be a NEST school for this upcoming school year. the NEST program will start out in one 6th grade classroom with up to five students (we have three confirmed as of July). Teachers working with the NEST group as well as other teachers on staff have already began training through the NYU and Hunter collaborative. The school leadership as well as another cohort of teachers will be receiving training during the fall. the NEST training is specifically geared towards supporting the learning needs of students on the autistic spectrum, however, all strategies are aligned to UDL and will support all learners as well as furthering the UNMS mission and vision as an inclusive and supportive learning community. Resources are provided so they can read on their own and learn how to increase access without compromising or changing the instructional objective. Every classroom is equipped with a Promethean Board and a document reader to support visual and auditory learners. Computers are readily available as supplemental tools to support student learning and project-based learning. Our Humanities curriculum is based on teaching social action through reading and writing. The infusion of English Language Arts and Social Studies is a total learning experience. Rather than simply imparting facts, we engage the students in units designed around essential questions that engage the young adolescent learner. We strive to provide students with the opportunity to set personal learning goals and take responsibility for their own learning through self-selected reading and writing projects. The Humanities curriculum is constantly evolving. This year, our school has been recognized by the District 1 office for our high quality Humanities design and will be showcased through a labsite process. The labsite will be mutually beneficial as it will allow our teachers to showcase their strong interdisciplinary and curriculum alignment through the Common Core and grade band spiral as well as making this work even more visible and intentional for our community. We all learn by doing and teaching, the labsite will give our teachers even more time to think and share best practices with each other and other educators within our district to help strengthen Humanities across the district. Our Math and Science teachers meet in content-specific teams to promote vertical alignment of standards and the reinforcement of mathematical skills through lesson planning and delivery. The Math and Science teams meet twice per week (in both content configurations) to engage in inquiry and to discuss and create activities and tasks that incorporate key concepts and standards from both contents, i.e., using graphs and charts to organize data, make predictions, and solve problems. The Science team this year is heavily committed to inquiry based approaches and further development of interdisciplinary units throughout the year. Our Project Arts program is designed to give students exposure to, and experience in, a variety of art forms. Students actively participate in project-based learning in the visual arts, musical theory and history and practice,theatre arts, movement arts and literary arts. The project arts teacher and musical arts teacher, also collaborate with teachers from different content areas throughout the year to support interdisciplinary connections and projects. Project Arts and Musical Arts meets Our Big Ideas in Art include, Art as a language (line, shape, form, value, space, color, and texture, with specific emphasis on line and shape) and drawing techniques, artistic vocabulary, symbolism and narrative expression, the language and creation of color, exploration of art and nature through landscape compositions and mixed-media, structural forms of poetry, photography and studies the language and creation of color. In the Musical Arts class students learn about the historical an cultural significance of music in our society and develop their own pod casts and montages that showcase a specific political or social message. Students engage in listening stations and work in groups often to collaborate and work on peer relationships and problem solving. Both Arts programs work closely with content teachers to build relevance within the content areas through multiple means of expression. Our Project and Musical Arts teachers collaborates with other contents to create interdisciplinary projects. In math, Measurement and scale: Students work with rulers, learning to use measuring tools, inches/centimeters, measuring and making geometric shapes to create perspective drawings, and the differences between geometric and organic shapes, two-dimensional versus three-dimensional space. Humanities: Speaking and Listening: one-on-one, small group, and whole class using discussion protocols, with the expectations that they elaborate and provide evidence from works of art to support their statements. Students learn to compare and contrast build on one ideas, use content-specific language during discussion. Students must understand the difference between description (literal) and interpretation (inferential/critical) to build language and evidence-based claims. An Art writing rubric has been 1  adapted for Project Arts. Rubric for assessing artwork, using art-specific content language, reflections in writing after the creation of their artwork. Connection between perspective in writing/reading and art as well as technique, such as craft and structure, which is analogous to the writing process. In photography, students connect metaphor to symbolism, another essential element in literacy. Understanding how the elements of art serve as a language for communication. In science, the color theory, why we can see, light, difference between visible color and application of color for art. revise this part: we are focusing on student-student discussions and more student agency. Culture re-wired as s shared text along with Discussion and questioning techniques are used to support higher order thinking skills and are reflected in our unit and lesson plans. These strategies are based on previous and current professional development work. The use of a common professional text have been used to highlight critical components of instructional design. This year, our mentor text is.... . To start to 2018-2019 our teachers will be engaging in Instructional Rounds, around engagement. For the second quarter, teachers will engage in shared readings with the use of protocols that align with align to short-term and long-term goals. Staff uses discussion and reflection protocols to assess their own work and the work of colleagues. This ensures participation by all staff members. The principal, via Google docs, creates periodic staff reflection forms to gain feedback and plan for further ways to deepen instructional practice and curricular alignment to CCLS. for example this year the teachers were given an opportunity to reflect on the circle work for the year and this will help to inform the grade specific time an planning that will take place. Teachers also gave feedback that will support more time in grade and content teams to ensure that there is enough time to plan and organize. Inter-visitation teams have been grouped strategically to support and encourage interdisciplinary curricular connections. Teachers will engage in classroom visits with their Triads or Quads taking low inference notes so that we can engage in the three level approach modeled after the Instructional Rounds approach to school improvement (revise to match the IV work for the year). Teachers submit lesson plans and unit plans, accompanied by relevant student work to receive feedback and as evidence of effective instruction. Elements of effective lesson plans are shared and reinforced during informal and formal observation post-conferences and templates aligned to the NYCDOE Danielson Framework for Teaching rubric. Students input and leadership is always welcome and expected at UNMS. Various opportunities for student leadership include students participating and in some instances leading their Friday circles(7/8th grade). A Justice Panel has been designed as a restorative justice peer leadership group that is responsible for meeting at least once a week to address student-related minor offenses under the guidance of our school counselor. This work will be built on for the upcoming school year as part of the Tier III RJ work. The Tier II work was designed to support specific classes that were not functioning well due to behavioral, trust or relationship issues in the classroom. These circles (tier II) functioned with mixed results this year but the community is committed to utilizing them during non core subject times and tighten up the structure so that they don't take longer than one 55 minute period. There also needs to be a follow up for each Tier II circle that takes place. We will continue to build upon this work and the development of Our SAPIS counselor also delivers college and career readiness workshops to support social language skills required to succeed in different aspects of professional and personal life. The CARES Team, comprised of principal, AP, RJ Coordinator, guidance counselor, social worker and supporting staff, meets on a weekly basis to design relevant town hall sessions, H.S. tours and trips, community building events (poetry readings, talent show, game day, career day, and planning of and follow ups of Teir II and Teir III supports and CARES day events and trips to support our at risk students. The team reviews student academic and social information to guide interventions. Since the last report, The NYU social work interns work on grade specific teams and support with high-risk students to help to make those students feel more a part of the UNMS community. 2  One of the qualities that we believe sets us apart from many middle schools is our persistence in seeking resources that contribute to a positive learning culture and experience. The past couple of years we have been working with community based organizations, like Henry Street Settlement, to provide High School and College articulation support. 99% of our students got into a High School of their choosing. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Circles work this year along with drumming allow students who struggle with connections and social emotional development to work on and enhance their understanding of the world and the healing power of drummer and circle work. In both, students have to learn technique and follow directions. In both, students have to work as team and perform assigned roles. In both, students determine the quality of their work based on a set of indicators established by the instructor. In both, students have the opportunity for alternate means of expressions; and, inferring what particularly emotions or feelings might sound like or look like. Both programs are geared to support ELLs and SWDs, providing opportunities academic and social emotional success. The hope will be to embed these practices even more throughout the course of the year. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the framework for great schools, our school continues to develop structures and strategies to support our students social-emotional needs. We have succeeded in creating a climate of social and emotional support and have developed systems based on feedback loops of information that help us monitor our systems and inform next steps as evidenced in our exemplary NYC School Learning Environment results these past three years, where at least 80% of our parents, 90% of our students and 85% of our teachers have given us feedback in order for our community as a whole to deepen this work through our RJ three Tiers approach. Through our CREATES work this year, We also developed stronger family community ties as this was the area in need of more focus and development. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 01M332 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 203 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 14 15 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 11 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 85.7% % Reduced Lunch 5.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 63.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.95 8% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 25.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 27 25 91.1% 2.5% 44.3% 23.2% 8.9% 1.0% 2 33% 5.9 12.4% 22% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This year, teachers engaged in inter-visitation (IV) cycle,s where teachers paired heterogeneously based on content and instructional strengths to engage in inquiry work centered on our instructional focus of engagement our instructional rounds work and then in book groups later in the year based on interest.Various protocols will be used to set goals, identify a strategy aligned to our PD focus, observe instructional practice by practicing low inference note taking and to look at student work to assess impact. Each IV cycle culminated with teacher reflections and oral presentations of their work followed by peer feedback. At the end of the year, teachers presented their work and learning to the entire staff. We will continue to deepen our inter-visitation work around Engagement. In PD, pairs will implement what they identified as next steps last June. During inter-visitation, pairs will continue to focus on the previous years goals around academic language 2016-2017 was around, student/teacher interaction, and student/student interaction. 2017-2018 lens was are student engaged and how do we know? For the upcoming 2018-2019 school year, our focus will be discuss specific ways to capitalize on student-student lead discussion and engagement.  During PD and intervisitations, teachers continue to discuss specific ways to capitalize off what was observed and what they ‘know’ to impact student learning Read, adapt and utilize survey materials through the use of protocols based on the book, School Culture Rewired The feedback and success of the academic fair (student led parent conference), teachers and administrators will be developed a formalized portfolio system that is student curated. The students used standards aligned rubrics to determine their proficiency and next steps for improvements. This not only supported student goals but it will help them to better communicate about their learning with their parents. We continued to align our teacher evaluation to PD support by looking for evidence of PD alignment in instructional planning, classroom instruction, team minutes and teacher reflections/presentations. Next Steps: the 2018-2019 school year we will no longer have the NYU partnership for our Professional Development work and therefore teachers trained in Faclitiative leadership along with the training done by Administration with our newer staff we will begin to give more leadership to our teacher teams both grade and content level during extended Monday PD time. Teachers will again be partnered in heterogeneous partnerships with a possible quad for reading texts together. We will spend more time in smaller teams during extended PD to 5  give teachers more autonomy around circles planning and interdisciplinary unit planning. Teachers will also take part in learning walks and lesson study. We will also be more strategic about using classroom observations to determine the impact of our PD to inform ongoing teacher support and differentiation. The administration will target and support specific teachers based on relationship building and content expertise. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. To Increase student achievement in literacy, science, and math so that by June 2019, 1) 90% of students will advance by one grade level and there will be at least a 20% increase in the number of students meeting proficiency, 2) 80% of students will progress at least one level as measured by the standards according to the school-wide rubrics that measure supporting ideas in writing. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Content teams will norm a specific writing standard related to supporting ideas to be tracked based on the results from the UNMS Literacy Across Content Areas Rubric. Content Teams will align this writing standard to be tracked cross-curricular. Content teams will Re-visit the rubric to ensure its applicability in all content areas and will add a non-fiction reading standard to be tracked cross curricularly. All teachers August 2018 thru June 2019 Administration,Staff developer, all teachers Norm inputting standards into JumpRope© for consistency across content teams for purposes of 2018-2019 CEP tracking . All teachers August 2018 thru June 2019 Administration, teachers Norm systems, standards based grading in content teams. How to show a continuum of growth for content standards (science-- possibly use AAAS Atlas of Science Literacy to identify proficiency levels for key content strands School-wide Intervention to meet the needs of emerging students (1’s) in Reading (decoding) and in Math (clinics) Teachers and administrators engage in Instructional Rounds and book clubs to deepen our collective understanding and also improve our instructional core through our knowledge and experience with the rounds During PD and inter-visitations, teachers continue to discuss specific ways to capitalize off what was observed and what they ‘know’ to impact student learning. All teachers August teachers,Administration 2018-June 2019 All teachers August 2018-June 2019 Administration, teachers 7 Read, adapt and utilize survey materials through the use of protocols based on the book, School Culture Rewired Identify key indicators aligned to Danielson’s Framework to be used as baseline and benchmarks for implementation (3b using discussion and 3c engaging students in learning 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6th grade orientation, parent teacher conferences, parent invitations to school wide and classroom celebrations (Science presentations, Poetry Slam, reading celebrations, end of the year writing celebration ( NYU) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, AP, per-session; Circular 6 common planning time (redefined as Professional Learning Time as per the SBO approved in June, 2018) . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Common Core Learning Standards-aligned grades. Mid-Point: MP2 Grades. ● Winter review of evidence/rating of indicators identified in the Fall, specifically aligned to Danielson’s 1e component. ● Mid-year teacher reflection via Google Doc. ● Team artifacts – minutes, data analysis, samples of student work teacher feedback and reflections. ● PD agenda and minutes with findings and next steps . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Assess students using EdPerformance in the Fall by November, 2018, in the Winter by February 2019 and in the Spring by May 2019.  MP2 Report Card/JumpRope Standard-aligned grades  MP3 Report Card/JumpRope Standard-aligned grades 8   Mid year 2019 performance assessment tasks with review by content teams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school places great importance on creating a risk-free environment for student achievement and we have seen our work pay dividends through a concerted effort on student behavior, restorative justice circles, and proactive measures to support all students. We have multiple forums to communicate with students and families to solicit feedback from them. These structures help us maintain a safe and orderly school environment and positive climate. ● Weekly Town Hall presentations include education on cyber bullying, progress toward graduation and conflict resolution. ● The school tracks and updates students identified as at-risk through weekly CARES team meeting. ● Counselors provide at-risk students with a minimum 40 minutes of counseling for 60 days. The school is open to parents and communication regarding student progress occurs at least twice per month. ● Parents are made aware of events at the school through our school website and twitter. As a result of the school’s efforts, there is an increase in student attendance, a significant decrease in incidents, and the Learning Environment Survey reports above average scores in academic expectations, communication, and engagement, although this year our parent survey results did go down. Consequently, the impact we have seen is a decrease in student referrals and suspensions as evidenced in our past three SIF reports and OORs data. UNMS utilizes many modes of communication including the internet, postal mail, autocaller system, and often through individual outreach. The UNMS Community website has recently been updated and we also utlize our twitter account often as a place where families can find information about curriculum, resources, calendar meetings and events, and it is interactive, in that we embed surveys to elicit feedback on specific and general questions. Feedback is shared with the SLT. Newsletters, calendars, curriculum unit updates are created and designed for families to share information about student learning and events at UNMS. Events are created to encourage community building, and workshops are developed for families on academic and socio-emotional topics. As a school that has an open door policy, we encourage our parents to come sit in our classrooms to learn what their students are learning. Every Friday, parents have the opportunity to meet with all teachers in-person and we dedicate time for teachers to do this work specifically as a means to ensure parents know there is a time they will be able to speak with teachers and administrators. We also make ourselves available before and after school, and during lunchtime. 0  Our past NYC school survey results show that parents and families not only respond and complete this system wide survey in higher numbers than the city average. Once this year's result become public, we will revisit our results and use it to modify this section as needed. .  meet weekly to review student data and identify interventions and next steps as needed  Create a calendar with events that support community building and celebrate academic and social achievement Develop events that could happen during PTA to promote Student voice and increase parent engagement  Work on implementing student feedback social/emotional support forms across all classrooms consistent  In June, CARES team will identify themes for each month based on previous years to align events and town hall work and promote consistency across school Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, at least 90% of all students will feel socially and emotionally supported as evidenced by a school-generated survey administered by the CARES Team throughout the year. By June 2019, On average 90% of students will agree or strongly agree with the statement “my classroom and school are places where I feel safe, supported, and challenged by my teachers and peers” on the quarterly student reflection surveys. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Student Attendance: Attendance All students Weekly Counselors, Secretary and School Aide (Attendance Team)  ATS Attendance folder is outside the door.  Daily attendance taken via JumpRope  After 3 latenesses, Ss will be assigned folder that they will need to use everytime they are late. o Letter is generated after 3 latenesses and Ss meet with Attendance Team o When attendance drops to less than 90%, parent meeting must be requested (Australia) o UNMS students of concern was created during June 2018 and will continued to be used as the targeted work for the 2018-2019 the school year. ● Analyze on weekly basis by Attendance team. ● Data is analyzed to surface attendance-at-risk students, positive student attendance, students trending toward at-risk-attendance, and students with improved patterns of attendance. Attendance concerns/positives were communicated to parents via personal, paper, and electronic communication.  The CARES Team will meet weekly to review student data and identify interventions and next steps as needed  CARES team will identify themes for each month based on previous years to align events and town hall work and promote consistency across school o Mid-day Mindfulness -students will engage in meditation and relaxation during recess time that promotes self care, reflection and restoring harm. students Weekly/Daily CARES Team,Teachers 2 Schedule restorative circles during non- core classroom time (or core classrooms if warranted) with follow-up dates and feedback All Students Weekly/As needed Admin, Guidance, and Teachers Added Create a regular form of communication between CARES team and learning specialists. In class (push in) support from CARES for Ss in crisis. Work on implementing student feedback social/emotional support forms across all classrooms consistently. Create a calendar in Summer/Fall 2018 with events that support community building and celebrate academic and social achievement Develop events that could happen during PTA to promote Student voice and increase parent engagement All Students Monthly CREATES 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. As we delve into our second year of CREATES our team will continue to develop and strengthen our connections with families through our quarterly family book club, poetry and student performance events as well as our continued efforts to invite families to school academic celebrations and performances that take place throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Program to support Attendance and CARES Team Meetings, Dean, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, SAPIS Counselor Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Weekly CARES, team leaders, and paraprofessional meetings   JumpRope Life Skills section for each content area Implementation of three tiered approach to social emotional needs (Tier I- weekly circles, Tier II-restorative circles 3  Tier III-Mediations Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Spring UNMS Survey   NYC Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: 4.2: ● Bi-weekly teacher teams looking at curriculum and making modifications. Annual unit calendars are aligned vertically within content areas (discuss degree of alignment) ● School- and staff-wide focus on academic language with explicit application in team planning and classroom instructional levels. ● School-wide adherence to UDL principles in lesson design and instructional delivery. (4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5) ● IV targeting specific implementation of school-wide PD focus, Academic Vocabulary and Culturally Relevant Pedagogy. 4.3: ● All content curriculum are fully CC-aligned. ● School-wide grading system is standards-based and CC-aligned. ● School-wide use of CC-aligned rubrics - each content uses normed CC-aligned rubrics, and school-wide writing rubric is CC-aligned. ● Focus on discussion and questioning that are based on previous professional development priorities to ensure multiple means of access to content ● ELL students programmed to receive focused support in language acquisition through parallel aligned Humanities instruction. ● ELL students programmed to receive dedicated support in content-area classes. 4.4: Schoolwide expectation and adherence to UDL principles in lesson design and instructional delivery. 5  Differentiated programming / flexible needs-based grouping based on student data and choice: Enrichment ● Creative arts / expression ● Social-emotional support (circles restorative justice) ● AIS - content-area academic intervention ● All students, including IEP and ELL students, are flexibly grouped in least restrictive environments, in all academic and enrichment groupings including participation of 12:1 students with general education students. ELLs are programmed to receive parallel instruction during specified periods (Humanities) throughout the school day, but are a part of the general population otherwise. ENL teacher also pushes into classes for additional support in the LRE. 4.5: School-wide shared data resources ● Literacy - TC Assessments ● JumpRope - CC Content-area assessments ● ELA / Math achievement and interim assessment data ● IEP Goals and Descriptions as well as transparency in communication of IEP students’ needs/progress Schoolwide normed reflective practices ● LASW and IV protocols ● Student work/inquiry process throughout the year in content teams and IV pairs Schoolwide use of student-work centered reflective practices academic fair. Next Steps (Restrict to as few new ‘innovations” as possible: Overarching new thing: Student Achievement/Teacher Reflection Portfolios, Deepen IV, Circle work, culturally relevant pedagogy. ) 4.2 Increase alignment across grade levels with regard to Academic Language related strategies ● Content-team addressable needs ● (sequence / spiral of academic language skills and strategies? - in content teams) 4.3 Increase school-wide coherence in PD focus areas (ex. cross-content Tier II vocabulary and concepts) 6  ● IV-addressable needs ● Refocus on student-centered inquiry process/cultural relevant pedagogy ● School-wide PD focus across content areas-interdisciplinary units 4.4 Increase involvement of students in the monitoring of their learning, including development of goals and self-assessment of needs and peer feedback. 4.5 Improve school-wide normed practices of collection and use of formative assessment data. Increased transparency in standards-based progress monitoring. Student achievement portfolios  Reflective practice (post-unit or post-term reflection)  Provided services such as Pull-out/ Push-in for ELLs across content areas and not just for ELA and Science. JumpRope to centralize and mediate communication regarding IEP student academic needs and transtiion  goals created for students 12 years or older. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of UNMS students will progress by at least one grade level and/or meet or exceed standards on the 2019 NYS ELA Exam. By June 2019, the percentage of students progressing by at least one grade level and/or meeting or exceeding standards on the 2019 NYS Math Exam will increase by at least 25%. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Maintain an independent reading program in humanities All teachers Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Engage students in student-to-student academic discussions and conversations based on texts. Use independent writing program in humanities All students September Teachers Engage students in writing in response to texts, discussions, and other content in humanities, science, and math Teacher leaders Use portfolio system that helps students track progress toward growth, a discussion checklist for students to self-monitor and a rubric for students to self-assess and give each other feedback. All teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018 through June 2019 October, December and May September through June Admin and Teachers Admin and Teachers, Students How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent and Family engagement will be ongoing throughout the school. Parent-teacher conferences will be done in more traditional format for the fall and winter, the Spring conference is student lead based on the reflective work the students do leading up to the portfolio conference. We also maintain an open door policy.and invite families to participate in our classroom celebrations throughout the school year (poetry readings, publishing parties, etc.) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. AP,Teacher Per-Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 8  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Initial, Mid-year and EoY Meetings IR and IV Cycle feedback    Teacher Reflections (e.g. mid-year reflections, reading reflections)  Classroom Observations  Assess students using EdPerformance in the Fall by November, 2018, in the Winter by February 2019 and in the Spring by May 2018.  Administer the same NYS ELA previous exam in September and April. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Weekly content teams, grade team and co-Planning  Grade teams and Cabinet  Use of protocols (e.g. Atlas)    MP2, MP3 and MP4 grades Summer Planning Session JumpRope and trimester Progress Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders and teacher leaders have considered and implemented a sequence of professional literature that serve as school wide mentor texts to support teacher practice and student learning. This past year’s instructional focus on academic language developed from our instructional focus on academic conversation in the content-areas. This extended previous goals to improve student discussion and questioning techniques as indicated in Danielson’s component and the common core aligned speaking and listening standards. School leaders collaborated with teacher leaders to align our inquiry process of looking at student work with teachers’ inter-visitation process. Teacher-pairs observed and debriefed each other on lesson delivery to support student learning through implementation of specific academic language strategies. The academic work of specific subgroups of students was looked to determine the impact of these strategies on improved student performance. School leaders implemented a system of tracking the same subgroup of students. Teacher teams engage in inquiry cycle to align PD practices to instruction and monitor impact using the standards identified in the beginning of the year and an CCLS-based online grading/tracking tool called Jump Rope. Diverse strategies and assessments are used to address student needs (i.e. NYS ELA Exam results, NYSESLAT results, NYC Progress Report Metrics, and on-demand student work). In content teams, all teachers look at student work to evaluate a baseline and group students according to proficiency levels using protocols. Students are identified, including a group that represents the ""bottom third"" for this standard, and teaching points and strategies are developed to improve student performance in this group. Content teams examine student work to understand gaps in student knowledge or skill; and to inform the revision of their instructional units. During these meetings, content teams revisit and refine curriculum units and engage in a structured protocol to ensure alignment with the selected Common Core Learning Standards. Next Steps Formalize specific teacher academic language strategies/practices. Such strategies are divided between teacher-oriented, rephrasing, modeling, thinking aloud; student-oriented such as “rephrasing,” Identify specific indicators using mentor texts and align to Danielson’s -focus on 3Ccomponent to monitor specific impact and deepen teacher practice and areas in need of improvement Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 0  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 80% of teachers will demonstrate growth and/or high levels of performance in component 3c (engaging students in learning) and 3d (using questioning and discussion techniques) as evidenced by observations. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Admin creates an observation cycle that reflects different aspects of professional growth aligned with professional development Admin works with lead teachers to ensure alignment of PD to Danielson’s Framework and protocols around “Looking at Student Work.” In the fall, all teachers will self-assess and identify specific research-based strategies they will implement throughout the year in their lessons to support the use of assessment in instruction. Teachers August-June Admin, teachers Teachers October-June Admin, teachers Teachers September-November Admin, teachers In the fall, Principal and AP observe teachers and conduct first round of observations. Teachers September-June Admin, teachers In the winter, Principal/AP conduct second round of observations focused on the use of assessment in Instruction. In the spring, principal conduct third round of observations focused on the teacher's specific goals and school-wide goals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During PTA and SLT meetings parents, Book Club, parent-teacher conferences and academic fair, families are given opportunities to learn about their children's growth and development as well as get to know other members of the community. Personnel responsible: Principal, AP, parent coordinator, teachers, PTA co-presidents and SLT chairperson. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  AP, teacher per-session (summer 2018). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Mid year check in Mid January  MOTP Data Review in February  End year review June Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Intervisitation Cycle Instructional Rounds Observation Data    MOTP Google Form and Data  Teacher initial, mid-year and final year meetings and reflections Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our inter-visitation program provides the opportunity for interdisciplinary curricula. All teachers’ unit and lesson plans adhere to the Common Core standards. School PD is anchored in the Common Core standards---speaking and listening, discussion, academic language, learning objectives. All content areas align to the literacy standards in the Common Core as a means of addressing our student achievement needs. Add claim and evidence / writing in math and science. We continue to work on building on our speaking and listening but we do not track S&L standards. Circles work is a useful place this year to build on these skills more explicitly in the next year. Next Steps We are working towards our curricula looking similar across content and grade level with a real sense of connectedness and purpose that is made visible to students. Students should have agency in all their classrooms with a great deal of self reflection and discussion taking place throughout the 55 or 110 minute blocks. Through the use of circles and the focus on Culturally Relevant Pedagogy we hope to achieve more consistency and student agency across the school and potentially reflect similar values. even if people come with different experiences. We are not sure how much curricula is examined, assessed, and revised in conjunction with administration or cross-curricular and we hope to improve in this dialog throughout the course of the year by providing more time for teachers to work in teams with admin. support. Learning objectives could be displayed in a more prominent way--both visibly in classroom and in the way teachers are speaking (especially for outsiders coming to visit and share in our best practices. As a result of divergence in both lesson plans and units, we struggle to communicate about teaching choices. Data is a bit stratified across platforms and can be challenging to use effectively and coherently across the school, that is why the labsite visits along with our NEST training and circle work will help to support a more cohesive vision and more consistent language across the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will improve parent communication as evidenced by a 20% point increase in the area of outreach parents in the NYC Learning Environment Survey. Specifically “the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school” will improve by 20% point increase. 4  5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Open school walk-through (one week annually? or one morning per month?) to see what students are doing in their academic classes All Students September thru June Admin and teacher leaders,CREATES,Parent Coordinator Create/send specific invitations to families for school community events beyond the calendar: All teachers August-June Admin, teacher leaders,CREATES,Parent Coordinator Book club Career day PTCs Portfolio night Implement a change to the yearlong student portfolio system across classrooms (that is shared with families at the spring student-led conferences to provide an audience of teachers and community members for individuals who do not have family representation available during SLCs. By the end of the academic year CREATES will plan and implement staff-wide professional development on Monday PLTs to enhance the interconnection between our school, our families and the community. All teachers August-June Admin, teacher leaders,CREATES,Parent Coordinator All teachers August-June Admin, teacher leaders,CREATES,Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Henry Street Settlement, Sonyc, Health Center Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  Teacher per-session and throughout the year for LASW sessions after school and during Saturday retreats at NYU if still possible. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Mid year check-in-February 2018 Learning Environment Survey   After School Program review  Book club review  Book club family participation rates  SLT family participation rates Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Newsletter, calendar updates, school messenger, digital communication systems, specific/individual flyers for events or clubs engrained in the UNMS community  PTA/SLT meetings, morning coffee??  Parent-teacher conferences 4x/year  6th grade orientation  Circle book club discussions, documentary events coordinated and developed by the CREATES team  Collect data for UNMS events (international food day, sports) o Send feedback to acknowledge families and their volunteering o Measuring Effectiveness/Impact o Parent attendance in Fall, winter and spring conferences o Parent attendance in school-wide events (Winterfest, Courageous Conversations events sponsored by CREATES team, Talent Show, etc..) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student performance below (2) and far below (1) standards as per the standards-aligned grades, progress reports, student work and/or standardized assessments. Mathematics Student performance below (2) and far below (1) standards as per the standards-aligned grades, progress reports, student work and/or standardized assessments. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) In a small group setting 3 times per week in an intervention period of 50 minutes. 2018-2019 expanding the Rewards program through further teacher training and development One-to-one tutoring two to three times per week. Targeted Small group & open to all students In a small group setting 3 times per week in an intervention period of 50 minutes. One-to-one tutoring two to three times per week. These students may also receive additional support after-school during Math Academy Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading Intervention Program : Guided reading, repeated readings, recognizing text features, predict and confirm, re-tell and summarize, draw conclusions, discuss and reading response journals, active listening, accountable talk, annotating text, anticipation guide and graphic organizers to assist students in organizing and expressing ideas. Fluency and accuracy, skill sequence, applied practice, error/solution explanation, peer tutoring, active listening, accountable talk Math Study Hall ELL Math Support in Native Language When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school During the school day. At times before and after school. AISwork takes place during IR 3-4 times per week with a range of grade levels During the school day. At times before and after school. After school once a week. At least 4 times per week. 8  Science Social Studies Student performance below (1) and far below (2) standards as per the standards-aligned grades, progress reports,and/or student work . Student performance below (2) and far below (1) standards as per the standards-aligned grades, progress reports,and/or student work . At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher referrals, at-risk behavior, attendance below 90% Targeted Small group & open to all students Beginner & Intermediate ELLs Targeted Small group & open to all students After school once a week. Targeted Small group & open to all students After school once a week . One-to-one During school . Science Content-area literacy strategies, vocabulary development, connecting background knowledge, active listening, accountable talk, guided reading. Humanities Study Hall: Content-area literacy strategies, vocabulary development, connecting background knowledge, active listening, accountable talk guided reading. Counseling for At-Risk Students. Before and after school when requested by parent or when necessary to address student need. Peer Tutoring Group Small group Small group counseling that addresses the social emotional needs of students. When needed contracts are developed for students on an individualized basis. SAPIS, guidance counselor and the dean also identify groups of students to 9  work on specific skills throughout the year. 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Blank 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Blank Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Blank 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  Blank 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Blank 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. At UNMS, Administrative staff and members our UNMS Hiring Committee attend hiring fairs to identify and help recruit highly-qualified teachers as needed. The principal and pupil personnel secretary works closely the network HR liaison to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. The Principal is responsible for training, facilitating, and monitoring professional development using Danielson’s framework and Universal Design for Learning as a frame of reference. Our Priority funds to provide professional development for our teachers focused on curriculum development and alignment to the CCSS and the use of UDL to support student learning and differentiation. All new teachers are mentored by a master teacher who has demonstrated highly effective teaching practices. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Though we no longer have our SIF grant for Professional Development our administration and teachers engage in these listed activities to ensure we continue to build capacity and facilitate teacher leadership across the school community.  Use of protocols to improve understanding of roles and tasks for teacher while working together.  Meeting with teachers and school leaders weekly to ensure continuity. Cabinet meetings  Encouraging supportive team practices.  Supporting teachers in their work to have a unified academic language approach that weaves through all aspects the school’s curriculum.  Helping teachers to better provide each other with constructive feedback.  3rd year of development of a portfolio model of instruction for the teachers to use with their students so that the student better understand their own educational progress and needs. Students were able to review their own work and present it to their parents during our spring student led parent conferences.  Circles development specific to the grade level needs and world and adolescent issues. We are in our second year of this work. 3  Our teachers will continue to participate intervisitations (IV) cycles, where teachers are paired heterogeneously based on content and instructional strengths to engage in inquiry work centered on our instructional focus of academic language across content areas. Academic Language was identified as a high need through our data analysis, which showed that students lacked use and understanding of critical academic vocabulary in the written and oral work. . Consequently, we have been able to engage not only in thoughtful conversations about this work but to provide staff with critical support to meet their professional needs. In additional, teachers will work on developing curriculum that is culturally relevant and through the circle work as adults and with students all members of the community will become comfortable with discussing relevant and difficult topics to ensure that the community is rigour in not only academics but social emotional development. We are in the process of working on In school instrutonal rounds with a focus on engagement. Book clubs as well as a shared reading of teaching with Poverty in Mind are part of our PD for the year. Throughout the cycle, teachers engaged in various protocols to set goals, identify a strategy aligned to our PD focus, observe instructional practice and look at student work and level of engagement to assess impact. Each IV cycle culminated with teacher reflections and oral presentations of their work followed by peer feedback. The inquiry of the IV cycle is aligned to the inquiry work of each content team. Each teacher follows a unique subgroup of students. The teacher looks at student work as part of the IV process to gauge the effect of academic language strategies on the level of performance exhibited by the student in each of their content area classes. In this way, our school wide focus on academic language is embedded in instruction across all content areas. Other PD and staff support will continue to address: PD Topic Engaging All Students in learning 3C Provider Principal Peynado, AP Moskowitz Culturally Relevant Pedagogy Principal Peynado, AP Moskowitz Impact Increase use of techniques that will engage students as evidenced in the students’ written reflections, portfolio work and grades, and increased reading level proficiency and discussion skills. Increased awareness of student engagement through the lens of student voice, connection, peer relationships through circles work weekly (1x adults, 1x students with facilitator) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). . 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All teachers are welcome and have the opportunity during their regularly scheduled meetings and/or Spring retreats to meet and provide research-based recommendations that inform the use of assessment using protocols to reach a consensus. As part of our Inquiry process, teachers are embedded in a process of looking at student work and teacher work using protocols to monitor progress towards goals and CCSS curriculum alignment. Additionally, our Professional Development continually evolves to reflect the needs, ideas, and opinions of teachers, with observations of classrooms and teacher teams to ensure the teachers are adequately prepared to administer and analyze assessment and develop appropriate instructional strategies from the results. Surveys and other forms are used periodically to give teachers the opportunity to reflect on their learning and practice, and to give feedback that can be used to inform school-wide improvement efforts. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5: Tenet 3, 4, 2, and 6 Goals/Action Plans and ELTProgram Goal/Action plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 48,022 5  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 811,22o x Section 5: Tenets 2 3, 4, 5, and 6 Goals/Action plan. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-6  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. UNMS in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. University Neighborhood Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 8  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, technology responsibilities for children and parent awareness of the dangers of online technology. understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services, High School articulation support, Cultural events that celebrate our diverse learning community.   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements State law. schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 9  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences/ Academic Fair and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed/twitter account/ emails to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) University Neighborhood Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. University Neighborhood Middle School I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 0  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences/Academic Fairs each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 1  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents and are a way to build relationships amongst teachers, parents, staff and administration. ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always do my best 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 1 School Name University Neighborhood Middle School Borough Manhattan School Number 332 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Laura Peynado-Castro Coach Sileni Nazario ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alexandra Collazo-Baker Teacher/Subject Area Binh Thai Teacher/Subject Area Christina Colón Related-Service Provider Judy Gruen Superintendent Daniella Phillips Assistant Principal Coach School Counselor Nichole Rowe Small Parent TBD Parent Coordinator Ernesto Garcia Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 237 4 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.59%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use the NYSITELL as an baseline, the NYSESLAT as a yearly assessment tool, and assessment that mimic the NYSESLAT in content and format. The data gives the teacher insight into the student's strengths and weaknesses in their reading comprehension, phonemic awareness, and knowledge of academic vocabulary. With this information we are able to be mindful with grouping, scheduling, and differentiation. With this information we are able to make any adjustments to our instructional planning and make arrangements to cover additional material in our Literacy Enrichment program where students receive L1 support. This program will highlight and emphasize skills and content that can be transferred into their content classrooms. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We design our program to ensure our ENL teacher can collaborate, evaluate data and plan with teachers to ensure curriculum and pedagogy alignment to meet student needs. 5  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ELL program by monitoring their NYSESLAT scores. Majority of students have shown growth. Growth is also shown through in-house created assessments. Our curriculum and grading policy are aligned vertically and horizontally so we can measure student progress toward mastery across the standards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Team planning time, use of protocols, and other professional development opportunities to plan interventions and curriculum alignment. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] From the time that a student is identified as an ENL student they are then given the necessary support from L1 support or further L2 support. Students receive L1 support from our Spanish teacher Christina Colón through push-in services in Math. Students receive L2 support in Math, Science, and Humanities from their ENL teacher, Alexandra Collazo-Baker. Additionally, students receive small group literacy support in our Enrichment period at the end of the school day. The ENL teacher targets any additional content that needs to be covered based on what was observed from push-in periods. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. What has been noticed is that all students have various degrees of language proficiency in written, oral, speaking and listening English competencies. Our sixth grade is mostly comprised of newcomer ENL students, they all tested at mostly beginner. Some students, such as those from Puerto Rico received higher scores on the NYSITELL which can be attributed to their access to English Language classes in Puerto Rico. One students from China scored a bit higher than beginner as well. She also attended English language classes in her home country. Majority of students that have NYSITELL data showed growth in all language modalities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Additional support is provided by programming our ENL teacher to work with teachers in helping make instruction accessible to these students and push into classes to model and provide support. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. University Neighborhood Middle School (UNMS) utilizes Pull-Out and Push-In organizational models to deliver ENL instruction, in addition to regularly scheduled paralleled ENL teaching classes that take place during Humanities.The push-in services are delivered with content area teachers. Our ENL teacher, Ms. Collazo-Baker, will plan and teach with various content teachers throughout the week. This way content instruction is able to be provided by two certified teachers at various times. ENL program models at UNMS are homogeneous for beginners and newcomers and heterogeneous for intermediate and advanced levels. Additional we have an enrichment period at the end of the school day where skills are reinforced. 6  b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Explicit instructional minutes are delivered as per CR Part 154. Each English Language Learner is programmed for ENL instruction based on the levels at which they were assessed upon admittance to our school or based on the results after reviewing their testing results at the beginning of the year. Entering students are programmed for 360 minutes per week of Pull-Out Beginner ENL class. Emerging and Transitioning students are pulled out for 360 minutes per week of Pull-Out Expanding ENL Class. Expanding ENLs are pulled-out 180 minutes per week. Classes at UNMS are 60 minutes long, which means that Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning students meet for six 1-hour class sessions per week and Advanced meet for three 1-hour sessions per week. Most ENLs are pulled out from their 2-hour humanities block, where they receive ELA and Social Studies instruction. Although UNMS follows the Freestanding ENL model, we also believe that providing areas of growth in a native language will help strengthen our students’ learning process and will also foster their acquisition of English as a second language. Therefore, we also provide native language instruction in Spanish for our majority Spanish-speaking population. The units vary on the content in the Humanities classrooms. Former ENLs receive services and support during a 60 minute enrichment period four times a week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas of Math, Science, ELA, and Social Studies are delivered daily to every student at UNMS. ELA and Social Studies are taught within a two-hour blocked Humanities class. Math is one 1-hour period daily. Science is also one 1-hour period daily. The four content area classes are taught in English. Beginner ENLs in content areas are paired with a bilingual classmate who can act as a translator and guide to the school. Translated materials (dictionary, textbook, workbook, worksheets, etc.) are provided for ENLs. Visual supports are used to further language development. ENLs are also given laptops so they can research items in their native language to help make content comprehensible in English. Ms. Collazo-Baker, the ENL teacher, models her own thinking in the classroom, introduces modified texts, uses visuals and realia, reinforces vocabulary and sight words. Our students use dictionaries, word walls, and grade level adapted texts in the classroom. Different methods that are used are TPR and Community Language Learning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The UNMS staff is organized by collaborative teams in order to address the needs of our school community together as a unified front. Teams work together on curriculum, unit, and lesson planning and organizing activities, trips, and events. Teachers meet in teams within their content areas. Teachers from different content areas meet together as The ENL Team in order to support our ELL population together. Teams meet in professional learning communities as part of their weekly schedule. From there we are continually evaluating student's home language though check in in their content area. If Ms. Collazo-Baker, our ENL teacher, or Ms. Colón, our Spanish teacher will target content in a student's home language if we see that the student needs that support and evaluation. 7  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. The instructional plan for SIFE is to schedule them in their appropriately assessed groups (usually newcomer/beginner) for English language instruction. Additionally, SIFE will need ample support in the fundamental concepts of reading, writing, arithmetic, scientific method, and logical reasoning. SIFE are given assessments in these categories. Teachers meet to strategize an intervention program for SIFE. Teachers work together with administration to organize the best plan for SIFE for each student involved. 6b. Newcomers to UNMS are supported by the ELL Induction Team. The team meets to plan instruction, events, and field trips that enhance English language learning and the experience of American culture in New York City. ENLs go to libraries, museums, and cultural institutions together to build community and background knowledge. Instruction is based on the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) model. Teachers work together to construct content and language objectives that are aligned to the thematic unit. Students complete a content objective that pertains to the content, or the “what,” by also completing the language objective that incorporates the four modalities: Listening, Speaking, Reading, Writing. Newcomer ENLs are also scheduled Humanities, where they are given supports for the ELA exam, although they will have an additional year until newcomers need to take the ELA. Test-taking strategies newcomers learned in their first year for the NYSITELL an be transferred to taking the ELA as well. 6c. ENLs receiving service 4 to 6 years at UNMS are generally in the Intermediate or Advanced levels. Our data show that a significant portion of the intermediate and advanced level students fell short in the reading and writing sub-tests of the NYSITELL , as opposed to the listening and speaking. Based on this data, ENLs receiving service 4 to 6 years at UNMS are placed in a specific intermediate-advanced reading and writing program (called “Book Club”). The ENL class for intermediates and advanced is heavily intensive in reading and writing. 6d. Long-Term ENLs who have completed 6 years or more of English language instruction have the most difficulty with the writing portion of the NYSITELL . Long-term ENLs are assessed and placed into a reading and writing program. Teachers meet together to see what persistent issues can be addressed. 6e. Plans for former ENLs in years 1 and 2 after testing proficient include: 1] Being grouped in the their content classes with students who have well-developed language skills--reading, writing, and speaking; 2] Receive 3 periods of reading/math enrichment each week and are heterogeneously grouped with students who have well-developed literacy skills; and, 3] afterschool homework help for any content area. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENLs with special needs are supported by the ELL Induction Team and the Special Education Team at UNMS. Teachers from both teams review the students’ IEPs, discuss best methods, and plan strategically together. ELLs with special needs participate in the push-in/pull-out model and are grouped by their assessed language levels. -- UDL, Universal Deisgn, assistive technology, ie: graphic organizers, color coded charts. All materials are grade approplogy Unit, a text was taken from a grade level book. It was rewritten and divided up so there was not as much bulk to the task. It had comprehension questions and important vocabulary words were bolded. The student is in charge of their own native language resources. If a student needs native language support we have native language dictionaries that students can use to support their independence. 8  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENLs-SWD are placed in either a mainstreamed classroom, SETTS classroom, or a 12:1 classroom setting depending on their academic and emotional needs. This is determined by the ENL teacher and Special Education team. Classroom academics and social emotional behavior are taken into account through observation and collection of student work. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The following targeted intervention programs are provided for the ELL subgroups indicated. Services are primarily in English, with a translator provided as needed. AIS Math (ENLs who are SIFE in need of Math intervention) - Students get small group instruction, scaffolded support using web based resourced such as Khan Academy.. Math Enrichment (Intervention/Enrichment math program for low-level ENLs in math) - ENLs receive targeted instruction during our Enrichment period if required or math teacher recommends the student. Our school does not have a separate social studies or ELA class. We have humanities class which is a combination of both. Our school's ENL teacher pulls out all ELL students for Humanties and uses her modified curriculum to teach the targeted content. Our school has an enrichment period. During our AIS period, our ENL teacher will observe the science classroom to see what content the ELL students are struggling with. Later on in the day, during the enrichment period, the ENL teacher will cover that material with ELL strategies. Additionally, our Spanish teacher pushes into content area classrooms to provide support in native language. Counseling (ENLs in need of counseling and/or guidance services) - Guidance Counselor counsels ENLs in need of intervention for up to 60 days even if they do not have an IEP. SAPIS Counseling (ELLs receiving mandated and non-mandated SAPIS counseling) - SAPIS counselor does by group and girl group interventions. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? There are no programs that are being considered. We are changing our AIS schedule so teachers receive more support in planning and adapting their curriculum for ENLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no services that will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have access to all school programs. We have several staff members that are bilingual that are able to provide support and materials in their native language. All ENLs are offered enrollment to our after school program. We purposely seek and ask for afterschool staff members from our CBOs that are bilingual so we are able to give more native language support to students during these programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In every core content classroom there are bilingual dictionaries. Students practice using bilingual dictionaries with their ENL teacher so they are able to be more independent and resourceful in their content area classroom. iPads and laptops are also available to students and are used as support depending on the content area. In every classroom, the ENL teacher has provided language tools like cognates and sentence starters to help ENLs in their native language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 9  Home language support is given if there is a bilingual staff member that speaks the same native language as the student. If not, we use dictionaries and iPads to help the student in their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures that all required services/resources correspond to ENLs ages and grade levels by making sure the curriculum is designed to meet the ENL NYS Standards and the Common Core Standards Addressed. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In every core content classroom there are bilingual dictionaries. Students practice using bilingual dictionaries with their ENL teacher so they are able to be more independent and resourceful in their content area classroom. iPads and laptops are also available to students and are used as support depending on the content area. In every classroom, the ENL teacher has provided language tools like cognates and sentence starters to help ENLs in their native language. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have a welcome to party for new 6 th graders. Our school has several community building annual events throughout the year that are important to our community and let newcommers feel part of the community. We have our International Food Day, Winter Fest, Spring Fling, and Talent Show. All students are invited to participate and help plan these events. Our after school coordinator, Ms. Alexandra Collazo-Baker and any staff members are invited to help, plan, and participate. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Our school does not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers are able to access ProTraxx and PD through our Manhattan Field Borough Center to elect to take professional development on their own. UNMS also fosters professional development among the staff by providing team meetings to address our students’ needs. Our staff regularly engages in professional development together as an on-going part of weekly routines. Common Core Writing Standards, Facilitative leadership, SIOP, Instructional Rounds, and Inter-visitations are a few of the professional development courses taken thus far this school year. Every week, teachers meet in grade teams (twice a week), in content teams (twice a week) and as a faculty (once a week) to engage in inquiry based work that includes strengthening academic vocabulary through instructional practice using excerpts from the book "Building Academic Language: Meeting Common Core Standards Across Disciplines" by Jeff Zwiers, Choice Words: How Language Affects Children's Learning by Peter Johnson, the book How's it Going? by Carl Anderson, the book Enhancing RTI: How to Ensure Success with Effective Classroom Instruction and Intervention by Douglas Fisher & Nancy Frey, and the book The Language-Rich Classroom: A Research-Based Framework for Teaching English Language Learners by Persida Himmele and William Himmele. 0  Our secretary and guidance counselor is included in the PD plan and they attend PD plans at the district level. We do not currently have an assistant principal. Teachers have attended SIOP and QTEL workshops. This year teachers also participated in "Academic Vocabulary: Academic Language to Support Grade Level Instruction" provided by the DOE. These PDs are specifical gear at helping teachers support ELL in delivering common-core aligned instruction. They give teachers strategies and materials to help differentiate for all types of learners. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENLs are encouraged to practice support strategies in high school that they have been using during their middle school years. Specifically, ELL students have experience using and creating graphic organizers to support their understanding of information. ELL students may continue using a computer to assist with writing. In addition, ELL students have been shown how to access translation sites for written language. Our school offers school based professional development focused on scaffolding and instructional supports for English Language Learners throughout the school year. We work with our appropriate network personal to gain more strategies to support out ELL population. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement at UNMS is significant on the individual basis. By that, it is meant that parents on the whole are very responsive to the needs of their individual students. We have significant attendance at all parent-teacher conferences (approximately 75%) as well as consistent responsiveness to the on-going academic, behavioral, and social needs of their children (which can also include parent-team conferences, academic intervention plans, and behavioral intervention plans). For ENLs, specifically, we have developed different strategies and “programs” to expand ELL services, such as language acquisition and social acculturation. ENL after school program 2x a week, Newcomer Induction Program with monthly field trips, 1-on-1 tutoring, and additional interventions. Parents of ENLs are required to attend an orientation that informs them of the options available to their ELL students. At these orientations, we take the opportunity to learn what specifically the parents feel are the needs of their individual child and we plan with this information in mind. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Part C, Question #1: There will be a meeting in September to discuss NYSITELL results and to make further plans for the student. IN preparation for the upcoming NYSITELL and anyone elegible for the state tests, there will be one scheduled for March. 1  2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Laura Peynado, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: UNMS School DBN: 01M332 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Laura Peynado-Castro Principal Melissa Moskowits Assistant Principal Ernesto Garcia Parent Coordinator Alexandra Collazo-Baker ENL/Bilingual Teacher Yael Goldberg Parent Christina Colón - Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Binh Thai - 6 th Grade Hum. Teacher/Subject Area S Coach Coach Nichole Rowe Small School Counselor Daniella Phillips Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/25/15 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 5  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 6  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 7 
