 06M346 School Name: COMMUNITY HEALTH ACADEMY OF THE HEIGHTS Principal: MARK HOUSE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Community Health Academy of the Heights 310600011346 6, 7, 8, 9,10, 11, 12 School Number (DBN): 06M346 504 West 158 th Street New York, NY 10032 212-342-6600 212-342-6605 Phone Number: Fax: Mark House mhouse@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Mark House Rob Karp Kori Wilson Rob Karp Jasmine Dones David Mills Imani Santos Erin Verrier District Information Geographical District: 6 Superintendent’s Office Address: Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 rcinto@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5124 Phone Number: Fax: 718-923-5145 Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan/Affinity Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn NY 11201 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: Fax: 718-935-5941   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mark House Rob Karp Kori Wilson N/A Jasmine Dones David Mills Imani Santos Erin Verrier Shirley J. Whaley Leah Werner Evans *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) JenniferVilla Kenia Jeanniton Robin Harrington Floyd N. Lee Jr Member/ Teacher Member/ Social Worker Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The proverb “It takes a village to raise a child” rings only half true here at Community Health Academy of the Heights. Like the proverb, we believe the health of the community is fundamentally important to the health of the individual. By forging strong relationships with local community organizations like CLOTH, New York Presbyterian Hospital, and Columbia University Medical Center, our students are offered unique opportunities to act as meaningful change agents in their neighborhood. Our teachers work collaboratively to identify student needs and prepare them for   college and ensure that they are equipped to think critically about and productively serve their community. The village raises the child, to be sure. But we believe that the child should be encouraged to, in turn, raise their village. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our school is a 6-12 school located in Washington Heights servicing the local community. The schools vision is to create a healthy student, mentally, physically and emotionally. We believe that our school has an obligation to meet the needs of the whole student. We believe that specific information about academic struggles coupled with a growth mindest and multiple opportunities to demonstrate mastery the best path to learning. Historically, the majority of our students enter with below average state exam scores and the vast majority qualify for Free and Reduced Lunch. As a historical "first stop" neighborhood we also have a high number of ENL students. We are a Community Learning School and a PROSE school. We have a wealth of partner organizations and have been the site used to host press Conferences by the DoE and UFT for both initiatives. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We service a number of high risk populations at CHAH. 122 of our current students are ENL. We typically see new arrivals with limited native language proficiency. The majority of our ENL students are native Spanish speakers, but we also have Arabic speaking students. We currently have 153 students with IEP's - covering a range of services. 91% of our students qualify for free and reduced lunch 13% of our students live in temporary housing This year we have worked to increase our capacity in delivering coaching and professional development in ENL, Literacy, Curriculum Design and Assessment. As a result we have made the most growth in Tenet 3 curriculum development and support. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We continue to grow our strengths around the Framework for Great Schools - Element 1: Rigorous Instruction - Last year we spent time exploring and implementing two additions to our Learning Targets (student friendly objectives tied to diagnostic and summative assessments) - success criteria and learning activities. This year we will deepen our practices in all three as we seek to have each element inform the other in our lesson and unit designs. It is the symbiosis that Learning Targets, Learning Activities and Success Criteria represent that is the most important driver of academic success at CHAH. We are especially looking at where our coursework falls in our goal of making sure our students are college ready. Our school continues to work on the creation and implementation of rigorous instruction in each and every course we offer. This year we will be working on our assessment practice, by rapidly evaluating the data from pre and post tests and adjusting our classroom instruction. We are also working to increase the rigor of our Learning Targets. 0  Element 2: Supportive Environment - We have worked exceptionally hard on this element and it shows in a number of places. Our Learning Environment Survey results are very high. In addition we have low teacher turnover. Students also rank the school high on the Learning Environment Survey when speaking about the safety and support the school offers. Students feel comfortable being themselves and taking risks in the classrooms. Element 3: Collaborative Teachers - Our staff meet once a week in Grade Teams and every two weeks in Department Teams. The overwhelming majority of teachers team teach. During our extended Summer PD sessions teachers work in teams on problems of practice. We have a robust teacher leader and mentoring program. Element 4: Effective School Leadership - Our principal continues to make wise decisions regarding resource allocation, new initiatives, hiring practices and goal setting. The effective leaderships stems from his leading by example as he teaches a class in an open model classroom, is a visible and energetic participant in after school programming, sets high expectations for staff and students alike, and is a consummate "resource gather" - partnering with multiple Community Based Organizations to bring resources to the school. Element 5: Strong Family-Community Ties - This element continues to be our strongest area in surveys and reviews. A vibrant PTA, an amazing lead Community Based Partner and a wealth of evening/weekend parent programming set the groundwork for these exceptional ties. Element 6: Trust - Again, a very high scoring area on the Learning Environment Survey for the school is the trust between all stake holders. This is a Community School (not the DOE model) and for a healthy community to exist there must be trust. The principal is often heard repeating two mantras about the school - There are no secrets in public education and no one learns when they are afraid. Goal 1 – Curriculum Design - By June 2019, teachers will complete a rigorous audit on their existing curriculum and create a set of public documents that shares their course learning targets with prospective and current students, families,colleges and public entities. Goal 2 – Evaluation of Restorative Justice Practices and Formation of New Discipline Process - By June 2019, we will complete a Restorative Justice program in all middle school grades to reduce detention and suspensions by 50%, based on data from our previous school years, which shows an increase in incidents of bullying, roasting, teasing, fighting and non compliance to school rules. Goal 3 – Academic Advising - By June 2019, we will conduct career and college goal setting with each individual student in all grades. Using those goals, data will be analyzed through a computerized advisory tracking system every 3 weeks which will impact student 1  achievement by showing average growth across all grades 6-12 by .6 and individual student growth as evidenced in our grading system JumpRope. Goal 4 – Observations Linked to Coaching - By June 2019, all teachers will set individual goals that will impact student achievement and improve pedagogy and best practices in 6 week inquiry cycles through coaching. Teachers will improve questioning and discussion techniques which will be measured by improving one level on the Danielson Rubric. Goal 5 - Parent Digital Resources - By June 2019, we will increase communication with our families to 60% by sending progress reports, calendars and newsletters monthly which will impact student's achievement by giving our families the information about their student more quickly. We will also move to have 20% of our parents move to digital communication. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 06M346 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 703 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 30 29 7 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 7 10 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 90.6% % Reduced Lunch 17.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 90.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.38 2% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 40.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 82% 65% 77.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes No Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 129 127 87.1% 2.4% 18.9% 6.5% 0.9% 0.3% 4 38% 5 19.2% N/A 80% 71% 79.5% 7% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In last years PPO visit we spent time examining the rigor of the Learning Targets the teachers had created for their lessons. The coaching and administrative team are conducting course audits and making suggestions to the department teams regarding Learning Targets. We are specifically looking at the discrepancy between credit accumulation and college readiness . In SY 2017-18 the graduation rate was 81% while the same cohort of students only had a 58% college readiness index. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will complete a rigorous audit on their existing curriculum and create a set of public documents that shares their course learning targets with prospective and current students, families,colleges and public entities. The more rigorous Learning Targets will move our college readiness index from 58% to 64% in the first year of implementation as measured by June 28, 2019. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Department Chairs will facilitate the final review process. Department Chairs Oct. 15 AP Instruction Departments will showcase highlights for the entire staff Nov. 15 Dec. Department Teams Department Teams Documents will go live on the website Dept. Teams Feb. Department Teams Corrections will be made as feedback is solicited from parents and other stakeholders Dept Teams and Instructional coaches Feb. 10 - Department Chairs May 25 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will conduct monthly workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Department Chairs, Instructional Coaches and the AP of Instruction. Per-session may be needed for some meetings, trainings and teacher worktime. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 5  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Dec. 2019, all curricula will be posted on the website. Teachers will continue to refine the curricula based on department feedback. The admin team will monitor the teacher's progress in their curriculum templates via the department team meeting notes. The school's website is www.chah.nyc Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Instrument 1 - Department team minutes Instrument 2 - Website population Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? This continues to be our school’s strongest area of the Capacity Framework - 80% of respondents to the NYC Quality Guide responded that this is a safe school. We have invested a great amount of time, energy and resource into making sure that we are providing all students with a safe, supportive and challenging school environment. This year we are continuing the roll out of our Restorative Justice model throughout the middle school. In the first two years we have seen a 25% decrease in reported incidents and a 32% decrease in suspensions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will pilot a Restorative Justice program in the 6th/7th/8th grade to reduce detention and suspensions by 50% during the 2018 - 2019 school year as compared to the 2017 - 2018 school year, which shows has shown increase of 15% in incidents of bullying, roasting, teasing, fighting and non compliance to school rules. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Our discipline review team comprised of one administrator, one dean, three teachers, one parent and one student will finalize the new policy guide for the pilot program. Staff, Students and Parents Sept 10 The key person is the APO We began a Restorative Justice committee in June 2017 that meets every two weeks to review student performance and data and implement restorative practices. These practices include peer mentoring, Saturday restorative School, Foundations curriculum and restorative circles. Committee will advise both teachers of the Foundations Course. Disciplinary Committee Sept 10 - The key person is the APO Analyze the results of the research to extract key findings. May 25 May 25 Disciplinary Committee Determine next steps - broaden the roll out, run pilot a second year with changes, end the pilot. Disciplinary Committee June 1 The key person is the APO The key person is the APO 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator will conduct monthly workshops and the parent advisory board will continue to give input into the program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will need per session hours for the members of the committee that work for the DOE and a stipend for the non-DOE members. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 8  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Sept 10 we will disseminate the policy guide By February 1st we will review the data collected on behaviors. By May 25th we will examine all the data from the pilot. By June 1st the committee with make a recommendation regarding the pilot. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will assess that we have met the deadlines imposed in the above plan. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Building on the success of our grade team work from the previous three years, this year we are expanding and improving our Academic Advising. Every three weeks each student will work with an adviser to conduct a complete review of each of their courses. That data will be digitally captured and shared as a report, including next steps and a time line for assessing progress. In addition the students will now be monitored on an individual college post-secondary readiness goal that was set in cooperation with each students' family. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will collect data through a computerized advisory tracking system every 3 weeks which will impact student achievement by showing average growth across all grades 6-12 by .6 and individual student growth as evidenced in our grading system JumpRope. These advisory cycles will produce two measurable outcomes. The first outcome will be an increase of 5% in overall GPA as measured from the June 2018 final transcripts to the June 2019 final transcripts. In addition there will be a 6% increase in college readiness from June 2018 to June 2019. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? During the summer, teachers will place students into heterogeneous Academic Advisory Groups.. Teachers in grades 6-11 Teachers and Administrators will be trained in the new Advisory Tracker System format, including the next steps action plan portion. Teachers in grades 6-11 Teachers will begin grade team meetings and the student intervention cycles. Teachers in grades 6-11 Advisers will collect data by meeting every 3 weeks with their advisees and supporting their academic goals through encouragement of studying, homework completion and retakes. This data will be shared with the staff and increase student mastery of their classes by regular tracking and adviser guidance. Initial evidence shows increase of .06 in overall student grades immediately following completion of each tracker. Teachers will begin individual PD on more challenging intervention needs and assess their proficiency in meeting the action plan deadlines. Teachers in grades 6-11 Principal All teachers and the principal. All teachers and coaching team Completed by August 15th Competed during the annual summer PD Start date, September 15th. End date, June 19th. All teachers and coaching team Start date, October 14th. Ongoing beyond that 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1  In the past years program we hadn't shared the action plans. Now, in combination with our goal to take parent communications digital we will be sharing the action plans. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. For the second year of the project we will dedicate on additional period a day to the Grade Team meetings and student meetings. In addition we will fund a coaching team consisting of one Master Teacher, one ENL Specialist and one UFT Teacher Center teacher. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2018 we will have conducted our first 11 cycles. We will have evaluated and discussed 640 separate students 11 times each. All work is collected and shared in a Advisory Tracker. The SLT will review a redacted log to verify that the goal of 640 students times 11 cycles has been met. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advisory Tracker - an online data base that collects the records and next steps from all meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This year we are increasing the frequency of the collection of information to every three weeks and we are taking action within 3 days of receipt. Based on the improvements we saw last year we believe that this will accelerate the achievement of all of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, we will move the over all cumulative school rating on the Danielson Rubric - 3b - Discussion and Questioning from Developing to Effective. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? During the summer the admin team and UFT Teacher Center personnel will review a wide sample of previous learning targets to determine the average DOK level 10% of learning targets using in 2016-2017 Start July 5 AP of Instruction End Aug 18 During the summer the admin team will review the Observation reports from 2016-2017 to determine the average rating for 3D on the Danielson Rubric Review all Observation Reports Start July 5 AP of Instruction End Aug 18 Include a full day of Webb DOK rigor increase work around Learning Targets in the summer PD All teachers Aug 29 AP of Instruction Include a full day of Increasing 3D work in the classrooms in the summer PD Implement an ongoing PD plan targeted at rigorous LT's and better Questioning and Discussion. All teachers Sept 10 - May 25 Aug 31 Entire Admin Team and Instructional Coaches Teachers found to be struggling will get individual coaching.Teachers will attend personalized, structured professional development that applies to their individual goals. In previous years we were attempting to meet specific targets in regards to filling our compliance mandates and tying the issues we uncovered with rapid interventions from our coaching staff. At this point in our observation practice the data is pointing strongly to two key areas - the rigor of our Learning Targets and the Quality of the Questions and Discussions happening in the classrooms. 4  6 week coaching cycles will take place through weekly observations and debriefs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator will conduct monthly workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In addition we will fund a coaching team consisting of one Master Teacher, one ENL Specialist and one UFT Teacher Center teacher. In addition much of the ground work is laid out in our three day summer PD. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, 10 teachers will be selected at random to review their PD plans and an analysis of their observation reports, the observations and the PD plans will be made to determine the effectiveness of this goal. Data will be pulled, when available, for the same teacher, over the same period from last year to determine the relative effectiveness of this year's Goal. Success will be deemed to have been achieved if staff are making demonstrable improvements in both Danielson aligned indicators and the rigor of learning targets. Mid year check in will be in February 2019 to determine growth and progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use the Advance NYC system to track progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Following our success with our texting system that notifies parents of absences, lateness and homework we are moving to push three new digital resources to parents this year. We will be moving to a digital newsletter, progress reports and monthly calendar. Each of these resources has existed in hard copy format, but will now be in digital format. We will monitor the parent usage and make adjustments as necessary. Our end objective is to increase the information parents have and lower the school's costs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase communication with our families as evidenced by an increase of 8% from 54% to 60% of our parents receiving digital communications. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Working in collaboration with our Parent Coordinator we will conduct four sessions to collect parent cell phone numbers and email addresses. Due to the success of our homework and attendance texting program, families requested access to other documents electronically. Increasing family involvement and communication will impact student achievement and help us support our students and families by providing our families with information more quickly by sending it electronically. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Oct 2017 AP of Operations, AP of Instruction, Parent Coordinator Parents who have not shared their cell phone numbers and email addresses Record the total numbers of texts/emails going out and compare it to our mailing success rate. All Parents Dec 2018 Continue to encourage parents to sign up for our digital resources. Monitor for possible reasons for non-participation All parents Oct 2017 Apr 2018 AP of Operations, AP of Instruction, Parent Coordinator AP of Operations, AP of Instruction, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Community League of the Heights NYP Columbia University Medical School 7  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will need approximately $5500 for the texting services. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, we will increase the total number of families that are receiving progress reports, calendars and newsletters electronically and expect to be at 60% . We will also compare our historical mailing rates with our current rates to see if we can determine any impact. We will continue to collect family emails and phone numbers to increase communication with our families. During our Spring parent engagement night in March, we will survey families to check in mid year and assess access and reliability of electronic communication versus standard measures such as mailings and backpacking information home with our students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily report of successful text recipients. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students that achieve a score of less than 3.0 on any standard, as expressed by a Learning Target are required to attend tutoring. Students that achieve a score of less than 3.0 on any standard, as expressed by a Learning Target are required to attend tutoring. Students that achieve a score of less than 3.0 on any standard, as expressed by a Learning Target are required to attend tutoring. Students that achieve a score of less than 3.0 on any standard, as expressed by a Learning Target are required to attend tutoring. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Students are given additional instruction in the standard and are then reassessed. Small Group Tutoring Students are given additional instruction in the standard and are then reassessed. Small Group Tutoring Students are given additional instruction in the standard and are then reassessed. Small Group Tutoring Students are given additional instruction in the standard and are then reassessed. Small Group Tutoring Remedial support is built into the school day and is offered in remedial classes. Additional support is provided before school and on Saturdays Remedial support is built into the school day and is offered in remedial classes. Additional support is provided before school and on Saturdays. Remedial support is built into the school day and is offered in remedial classes. Additional support is provided before school and on Saturdays Remedial support is built into the school day and is offered in remedial classes. Additional support is provided before school and on Saturdays 9  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are regularly screened for risk factors or they are mandated based on IEP documentation. Some students receive group counseling and some receive one-on-one counseling. Some students receive group counseling and some receive one-on-one counseling. All of our at-risk services are provided during the day. 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 85 Students All of our STH students get free school supplies and uniforms. We also partner with our lead CBO to assist with finding more permanent housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Title I 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  Title I 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Title I 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In the previous school year we had an extraordinarily low teacher turnover. The positions we hired for were one Special Education Teacher and one Spanish Teacher. All of the newly hired teachers are HQT. We continue to work with New Visions for Public Schools to recruit and staff our vacancies as they arise. We have a full time mentor on site for our teaching staff through the UFT teacher center. All new teachers have weekly meetings with the principal for support and coaching. These strategies have worked to dramatically increase our teacher retention of HQT as our last 4 years demonstrate - retaining 92% of our staff year to year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All teachers are involved in coaching cycles run by the UFT Teacher center, the master teacher, one of the assistant principals or the principal. The entire staff also gets together for in depth professional development sessions. Departments meet semi-weekly for 2 hours to examine curriculum and review performance tasks, in addition to sharing best instructional practices. Our paraprofessionals meet twice a month to examine best practices and to share successes and to discuss possible new strategies. Our Administrative Team attends regular professional development offered by the NYCDOE and New Visions for Public Schools on a variety of subjects ranging from better use of the budget to curriculum design. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We have developed an internal system of ongoing assessment in each classroom. Our teachers all give pre-assessments, evaluate the data, give ongoing assessments throughout the unit, adjust instruction, and then give end of unit assessments. We have ongoing PD around successful assessment design, appropriate questioning technique and data analysis. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 418,691.00 X 4 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 4b  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 0 15,949.00 0 4,096,237.00 X X 4b 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 5  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Community Health Academy of the Heights , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds (ESSA) Act., is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. (The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. The review will be conducted annually in April of each year. Results will be shared with the SLT and changes will be enacted in the upcoming year.) Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 7  Community Health Academy of the Heights will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology - this work is done in monthly workshops and includes learning how to log into our online gradebook, establishing an email address, getting signed up for our text notification system and navigating the resources on the our website. ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children - including workshops on IEP's, 504's financial aide and the college application process. ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress - through the use of our advisory system and online gradebook ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments - through twice a year meetings to address questions and concerns about state and city exams. ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand - by sending out a month calendar in both English and Spanish as well as publishing all dates on the website. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; 8  ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before October 30th of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 9  School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) Community Health Academy of the Heights, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds (ESSA) Act., is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 0  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 1  Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: CHAH ELL Afterschool Academic Support Program Rationale: As an instructional team consisting of the principal, assistant principal and the ELL department chairs, we have looked at progress reports and testing data, as well as our ELL Data Analysis Tool, and have determined that English learners at CHAH are struggling in their content area classes and on state exams. We would like to continue the CHAH ELL Afterschool Academic Support Program to increase the cognitive academic language proficiency of the English Language Learners so they can attain academic standards and achieve success in the classroom and on state exams. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: The CHAH ELL Afterschool Academic Support Program will serve English language learners (ELLs) in grades 6- 12. Students of all proficiency levels will attend the Supplemental Integrated ENL/Core Content Area classes to assist students with academic language development for success in their content area classes. Description of Supplemental Program: The CHAH Afterschool Support Academy will focus on supporting English Language Learners in the content areas, such as of Earth Science, Global History, and Algebra for high school, and Math and Science for Middle school. The program will consist of approximately two after school tutorial groups that meet twice a week on Mondays and Thursdays from 3:00 to 4:30pm. One group will be middle school students in grades 6-8 and the other will be high school students in grade 9-12. This program will provide opportunities for our English learners to gain English proficiency through active and hands-on engaging activities in the content areas such as feature article blogging, writing for a school newsletter, academic vocabulary word analysis with visuals, analysis of primary sources materials through Newsela, activities with math manipulatives for letting students explore and develop reasoning and problem-solving skills. and language-based science activities. Language of Instruction: The language of instruction will be in English with home language supports and materials as necessary. Saturday Content Area Field Trip: Starting in November, once a month on Saturdays from 10:00am to 1:00pm (approximately six times this school year) , students in the CHAH Afterschool Support Academy will attend a field trip related to their after school studies to places such as the American Museum of Natural History, the NYC Botanical Gardens, the General Grant National and the South Street Seaport Museum. Field Trips will be aligned to classroom curriculum for Earth Science and US History. Materials Used: The teachers will use materials by National Geographic Learning / Cengage Learning, specifically the Edge Leveled Library, Inside Phonics, Inside the USA, and Inside Language, Literacy and Content, all of which are especially developed to use highly engaging National Geographic exclusive content to help English language learners achieve success with Common Core State Standards and their content area classes. The teachers will also use Newsela, an online and print program that provides students access to primary sources, scientific articles, and current events articles from world-class news publications that adapt to each student's reading level. 5  Mr. Waligory holds a professional certificate in ESOL K-12. He will teach the high Ms. Doscher holds an initial certificate in ESOL K-12 and ELA 7-12. Ms. Rebecca Stanton holds a professional certificate in both ESOL and ELA 7-12. Ms. Leah Werner-Evans holds an initial certificate in ESOL K-12. She will teach the Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Numbers and types of certified teachers: The CHAH Afterschool Support Academy classes will be taught by four ESOL teachers. · &nbsp;She will teach the high school after school program. · middle school after school program. · school after school program. · Ms. Rebecca Stanton holds a professional certificate in both ESOL and ELA 7-12. She will teach the high school after school program. Ms. Leah Werner-Evans holds an initial certificate in ESOL K-12. She will teach the middle school after school program. Mr. Waligory holds a professional certificate in ESOL K-12. He will teach the high school after school program. Ms. Doscher holds an initial certificate in ESOL K-12 and ELA 7-12. Enrollment of the CHAH ELL Afterschool Academic Support Program Teacher Class Title and Description Projected Enrollement Class Schedules Total Number and Hours of Classes Ms. Leah Werner Middle School Class: Grades 6 - 8 in Supplemental Integrated ENL/Core Content Area classes. Projected enrollment: 20 students, Entering through Expanding ELLS Wednesdays and Thursdays from 3:00 to 4:30pm. September 17, 2018-June 6, 2019 62 classes total,meeting for a total of 93 hours Teacher: Ms. Rebecca Stanton, Ms. Doscher, Mr. Waligory High School Class: Grades 9 - 12 in Supplemental Integrated ENL/Core Content Areas of Earth Science, Algebra, and Global Studies Projected enrollment: 20 students, Entering through Expanding ELLS Mondays and Thursdays from 3:00 to 4:30pm. September 17, 2018 through June 6, 2019. 62 classes total,meeting for a total of 93 hours Saturday Teacher: Rebecca Stanton and Emily Doscher Saturday Content Area ELL Field Trip 20 students total, Entering through Expanding ELLS in high school. November 19, 2018 December 17, 2018, January 21, 2019, March 18, 2019, and May 20, 2019 from 10am through 1:00pm 5 field trips total, meeting for a total of 15 hours (times 2 teachers equaling 30 hours per session) Total per session hours 495 hours 6  rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: In House Professional Development Other professional development workshop will be offered at our site by Rebecca Stanton and Leah Werner-Evans , the ENL department chairpersons, Suzanne Pratt, program coordinator and ESL specialist at Teachers College, and Sophie Knowles and Caroline Suh, Literacy specialists at New Visions for Public Schools . Following are the tentative professional development sessions, titles, and times. Title: Scaffolding Reading and Writing for ELLs with Text Structures Date: October 17, 2018, 1:15-2:50 Participants: ENL teachers (6) Providers: ENL department chairpersons Rebecca Stanton and Leah Werner-Evans, Teachers College program coordinator Suzanne Pratt, and Literacy Specialists at New Visions for Public Schools Sophie Knowles and Caroline Suh. Follow - up professional development in this area (scaffolding with text structures) will continue in ENL department meetings throughout the school year. Title: Planning for ELLs - Writing Language Objectives for Content Area Classes and Aligning them with Academic Tasks Date: December 19, 2018, 3:00 - 4:30 Participants: ESL teachers (6), ELA teachers (7), science teachers (7), history teachers (7) Providers: Rebecca Stanton and Leah Werner-Evans Follow- up professional development in this area will continue in departmental meetings, when departments will gather together to look at the student work. Rebecca Stanton and Leah Werner-Evans will meet with departments and individual teachers for ongoing support in this area. Title: Analyzing the Language Demands of Academic Tasks for ELLs (Part 2 of Writing Langauge Objectives Aligned with Academic Tasks) Date: January 16, 2019 1:15-2:50pm Participants: ENL teachers (5), ELA teachers (7), science teachers (7), history teachers (7) Providers: Rebecca Stanton and Leah Werner-Evans Follow - up professional development in this area will continue in departmental meetings, when departments will gather together to look at the student work. Rebecca Stanton and Leah Werner-Evans will meet with departments and individual teachers for ongoing support in this area. Title: Scaffolding Reading and Writing for ELLS with Visuals and Graphic Organizers Date: March 20, 2019, 1:15-2:50pm Participants: ENL teachers (5), ELA teachers (7), science teachers (7), history teachers (7) 7  Part C: Professional Development Providers: Rebecca Stanton and Leah Werner-Evans, Literacy Specialists at New Visions for Public Schools Sophie Knowles and Caroline Suh. Follow - up professional development in this area will continue in departmental meetings, when departments will gather together to look at the student work. Rebecca Stanton, Leah Werner-Evans, Sophie Knowles and Caroline Suh will meet with departments and individual teachers for ongoing support in this area. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: The CHAH Parent Engagement Activities: Rationale: The Parent Center at CHAH offers a wide variety of activities and workshops that will support the parents of English learners. Parent Notification: Parents will be informed of these meetings by phone calls home by a bilingual staff member. A parent orientation for parent of new incoming ELLs and all returning ELLs will be held on Wednesday, September 26, 2018. A morning (10:30am - 11:30 am) and evening session (6:00pm - 7:00 pm) will be held to allow all parents an opportunity to attend. At this meeting parents will be informed about the CHAH ENL program, NYSESLAT and NYSISTELL testing, the CHAH ENL after school program, and strategies they can use to support their child's language learning and academic success. The ENL department will also hold quarterly parent engagement meetings based on the self-identified needs of the ELL parent community. This ELL parent engagement meeting will be facilitated by the ENL department chairpersons and will be held monthly on Wednesday evenings on the first Wednesday of the month, unless there is no school on that Wednesday, in which case it will be held on the following Wednesday. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 19900 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. Per session 8 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 19900 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per diem 2. Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 6 School Name Community Health Academy of the Heights Borough Manhattan School Number 346 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mark House Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Leah Werner-Evans and Rebecca Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal David Falciani Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent N/A Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 723 0 Total number of ELLs 115 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.91%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses a web-based literacy assessments, ReadingPlus, to access the reading levels of our students. If students score far below grade level on these assessments, ENL teachers also assess ELLs’ early literacy levels using either TCRWP running records or Qualitative Reading Inventory running records. This data shows that many of our students who are still categorized as ELLs read at least two grade levels below their peers. If they are Entering or Emerging ELLs, they often read at a 1st to 3rd grade level. This informs our school’s instructional plan by allowing us to select content area reading and instructional materials that are at the instructional level for each individual student. It also helps us in programming the correct courses for our ELLs, including literacy courses, Stand Alone ENL classes, and Integrated ENL/ELA courses. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? For 6th-7th grade: Integrated ENL/Science courses for ELLs of all levels as well as Commanding ELLs who still require two years of ENL services under Part 154. We also have an ENL literacy course for ELLs of all levels who would benefit from small group 1  instruction to move them towards grade level reading and writing. In 8th grade, we have Integrated ENL/Science courses for ELLs of all levels as well as Commanding ELLs. For all Entering-Transitioning ELLs in middle school, we have an Integrated ENL/ELA course that is taught by a dually-certified ENL/ELA teacher. For high school, Entering-Emerging ELLs are placed in an Integrated ENL/ELA course that is taught by a dually-certified ENL/ELA teacher. High school ELLs who are at the transitioning level are in an separate integrated ENL/ELA course that is also taught by a dually-certified ENL/ELA teacher. ELLs who are new arrivals to the country are placed in an integrated ENL/Science course that is co-taught by the Earth Science teacher and an ENL teacher. Students in high school also receive ENL support in their social studies classes in an integrated structure. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? One of the tools we use to help us determine the success of our programs for ELLs is the AMAO tool. We also track ELLs with an online Googledoc tracker created by our guidance department that allows us to see credits accumulated, Regents tests passed, and scores on state ELA, math, and science tests. In addition, we use an online Google spreadsheet tool called Student Sorter that was created for us by New Visions. This tool aggregates data from multiple DOE sources (such as STARS and ATS), is updated on a weekly basis, and pulls tests data, course credits, IEP, SIFE and ELL status and allowed accommodations, and other data we find helpful in working with our ELLs. All of the tools help us in determining the progress toward achievement of proficiency and in looking at the achievement of specific subgroups of ELLs. All of these tools provide the data we use to help us design effective instructional programs and interventions to meet the instructional needs of our ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL department co-chairs work with the AP of operations and the guidance department to continually implement summative data through schedule changes and grade team meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT data shows us that our ELLs at the Entering through Expanding are making progress by moving as expected from Entering to Expanding levels (spending about a year at each level), but are getting stuck at the Expanding level. As a result, we have set up several additional Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area (science or social studies) classes to support the Expanding ELLs. In these classes the ESL teachers works as a co-teacher with the ELA or other content area classes in an integrated co-teaching model. Our high school ELLs that initially test at the Entering level on the NYSISTEL often spend longer at this level than we would like. This year we set up special small (5-8 students) Intergrated ENL/ELA classes with a dually certified ESL/ELA teacher to provided targeted language support at their language proficieny levels. These students also benefit from a new stand alone ENL class, as well as from an additional Integrated ENL/Content area class in history or science twice a week. It is hoped that these additional supports will move these students accorss the performance levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL department co-chairs work with the AP of operations and the guidance department to continually implement summative data through schedule changes. Part IV: ELL Programming 2  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. For 6th-7th grade: Integrated ENL/Science courses for ELLs of all levels as well as Commanding ELLs who still require two years of ENL services under Part 154. We also have an ENL literacy course for ELLs of all levels who would benefit from small group instruction to move them towards grade level reading and writing. In 8th grade, we have Integrated ENL/Science courses for ELLs of all levels as well as Commanding ELLs. For all Entering-Transitioning ELLs in middle school, we have an Integrated ENL/ELA course that is taught by a dually-certified ENL/ELA teacher. For high school, Entering-Emerging ELLs are placed in an Integrated ENL/ELA course that is taught by a dually-certified ENL/ELA teacher. High school ELLs who are at the transitioning level are in an separate integrated ENL/ELA course that is also taught by a dually-certified ENL/ELA teacher. ELLs who are new arrivals to the country are placed in an integrated ENL/Science course that is co-taught by the Earth Science teacher and an ENL teacher. Students in high school also receive ENL support in their social studies classes in an integrated structure. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As described above, the Integrated ENL/ELA classes at CHAH meet for 250 minutes a week and are either co-taught between an ENL certified teacher and an ELA certified teacher or are taught by a dually certified ENL/ELA. The Stand Alone ENL classes (for Entering and Emerging ELLs) also meet for 250 minutes a week. This means that middle school Entering and Emerging ELLs receive 500 minutes of ELL services a week, and the Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 250 minutes of ELL services a week. This is the same for ELLs at the high school level, except that the Entering ELLs receive an additional 50 minutes of services by having the high school ENL teachers work in one of their science or history classes for one period a week, helping with academic language, visuals, etc. to support their cognitive academic language growth.: 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. CHAH, all core content (except for Spanish classes) is delivered in English with home language supports provided as necessary. The instructional methods and approaches used at CHAH to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards include but are not limited to are the TCRWP reading and writing workshop, grade team aligned and departmentally aligned curriculum (which allows ENL teachers to look meaningfully at student work together and to share best practices), the Jane Schaffer Writing Program (to teach essay structure and to provide effective feedback and opportunities for meaningful group work), Cooperative Learning, and several AVID strategies, including Cornell notes, Carousel Brainstorming, Concept Mapping, Jigsaw, and Dialectical Journals. We also use several strategies, or scaffolds, that are especially effective for ELLs, such as cues and advance organizers or other such activities that activate prior knowledge, nonlinguistic representations, turn and talks, think-pair-share, modeling, graphic organizers, sentence starters, front-loading of vocabulary, visuals, gallery walks, guided reading, guided note taking, and interactive writing. By looking at student work in departmental meetings, ENL teachers are able to reflect on practices that are most effective for the ELLs at CHAH. 3  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? CHAH ensures that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language at least twice a year by administering the Spanish version of the Woodcock-Muñoz Language Survey, which provides a norm-referenced measure of reading, writing, listening, speaking, and comprehension in Spanish. If the ELL speaks a language other than Spanish, the student’s home language skills will be assessed using the LENS, or by enlisting the services of the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit to help us conduct the evaluation. Each student at CHAH takes a Spanish class, so the Spanish teacher is contacted to determine progress in the home language for the vast majority of ELLs that are Spanish speakers. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students at CHAH are placed in the grade level appropriate 01 class so that they receive two 50 minute periods a day with a certified ENL teacher. We differentiate instruction for SIFE students by all of the methods mentioned in the answer to question 3 above. We also differentiate instruction for SIFE students by providing access to appropriate content area materials at their instructional reading level in materials such as the National Geographic Learning Edge Fundamentals or Level A program and support materials (for high school) or the National Geographic Learning Inside Fundamentals or Level A program and support materials(for middle school), as well as readings from Newsela and ReadingPlus. b. Newcomer ELLs are usually at the Entering, Emerging, or perhaps Transitioning proficiency levels. We differentiate instruction for them by placing them in the grade level appropriate 01 class so that they receive either one or two 50 minute periods a day with a certified ENL teacher (depending on their proficiency level), and one period of Stand Alone ENL if they are Entering or Emerging ELLs. If they are Entering ELLs, they are placed in an Integrated ELA/ENL class for Entering ELLs that is taught by a teacher that is dually certified in both ELA and ENL. Newcomer ELLs also benefit from all of the methods mentioned in the answer to question 3 above. Like the SIFE students, Newcomers are provided access to appropriate content area materials at their instructional reading level in materials such as the National Geographic Learning Edge Fundamentals or Level A program and support materials (for high school) or the National Geographic Learning Inside Fundamentals or Level A program and support materials(for middle school), as well as readings from Newsela and Achieve 3000. Because we assess the reading levels of all the ELLs, we are able to match them with materials at their instructional levels. c. Developing ELLs. At CHAH we differentiate instruction for Developing ELLs by placing them in either the grade level appropriate 01 or 03 class, although most of our Developing ELLs are at the Expanding proficiency level. Their placement is made depending on their need, as assessed by the ENL and ELA teachers. The 01 and the 03 classes are co-taught in a ICT model by both a ENL and a Content-Specific teacher. The 03 is also co-taught by a special education teacher, which means there are three adults in the room to support student learning. Developing ELLs also benefit from all of the methods mentioned in the answer to question 3 above. Like the SIFE students and Newcomers, Developing ELLs are provided access to appropriate content area materials at their instructional reading level in materials such as the National Geographic Learning Edge Level A or Level B program and support materials (for high school) or the National Geographic Learning Inside Level A or Level B program and support materials (for middle school), as well as readings from Newsela and Achieve 3000. Because we assess the reading levels of all the ELLs, we are able to match them with materials at their instructional levels. d. Long term ELLs: At CHAH all of our long term ELLs (except for some of the students with disabilities, which will be mentioned below) are at at the Expanding proficiency level, and seem to be “stuck” there. We are currently meeting as an ENL department and in grade teams to develop best practices to support our long term ELLs so that they can move to a Commanding proficiency level. We currently differentiate instruction for long term ELLs by placing them in the 03 class, where they receive support from the ENL, special education, and ELA teacher. We also support them with all of the other supports that we use for the other ELLs, and especially focus on providing targeted feedback on written work and providing extended time for small group guided reading and other reading supports. e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status: Former ELLs receive all of the testing accommodations that ELLs receive for two years after exiting the ELL program at CHAH. They are monitored and supported in the 01 or 03 classes by the ENL and Content-Specific teachers. In either of these classes, they receive 250 minutes of ENL support in an Integrated ENL/ELA class. Their placement is made depending on their need, as assessed by the ENL and ELA teachers. The 03 is also co-4  taught by a special education teacher, which means there are three adults in the room to support student learning. Former ELLs also benefit from all of the methods mentioned in the answer to question 3 above. Former ELLs are provided access to appropriate content area materials at their instructional reading level in materials such as the National Geographic Learning Edge Level B or Level C program and support materials (for high school) or the National Geographic Learning Inside Level B or Level C program and support materials (for middle school), as well as readings from Newsela and Achieve 3000. Because we assess the reading levels of all the students at CHAH, we are able to match them with materials at their instructional levels. We also support them with all of the other supports that we use for the other ELLs, and especially focus on providing targeted feedback on written work and providing extended time for small group. Former ELLs receive these services up to two years after exiting ELL status, as per CR Part 154.2. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At CHAH all of our ELL-SWDs are placed in the 03 class, where they receive support from the ENL teacher, the special education teacher, and the ELA teacher. We also support them with all of the other supports that we use for the other ELLs, and especially focus on providing targeted feedback on written work and providing extended time for small group guided reading and other reading supports. ELL SWDs who have more extensive disabilities are placed in a self-contained class with a biligual special education certified teacher who is also certified in ENL. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At CHAH the ELL-SWDs are placed in the least restrictive environment in the 03 class, which contains both students with disabilities and students without disabilities. The special education teacher "travels" with this class, serving as the learning specialist who co-plans and teaches with the general education core content teachers in an ICT setting to meet the learning needs of the students in the class, including the ELL-SWDs. The ENL teacher also co-teaches with the ELA and special education teacher to meets the needs of the ELL-SWDs. All teachers work with the IEPs of the ELL-SWDs to ensure that the IEP goals are met. If a ELL has an IEP, the ENL teacher is an active member of the IEP team. If it is determined by the IEP team that an ICT setting is not the least restrictive environment for the student, the student is placed in a self-contained special education classroom with a dually certified special education - ENL teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted invervention programs for ELLs in ELA are mentioned above. They include the National Geograhic Edge programs, (Fundamentals for high school Newcomer ELLs, Level A and B for high school Developing ELLs) and National Geographic Inside program (Fundamentals for middle school Newcomer ELLs, Levels A and B for Developing ELLs). Also, our ELLs are offered Stand Alone ENL if they are at the Entering and Emerging levels. Transitioning ELLs that are struggling academically may also be placed in the Stand Alone ENL classes. All ELLs are supported in Integrated ENL/ELA classes. In math, the intervention programs are I-Ready, an online instruction and practice program for Mathematics that fully prepares students for the Common Core Learning Standards in a highly supportive way with videos, visuals, diagrams, and online interactive exercises that are individualized. CHAH also has a new STEM program that supports ELLs and other learners with an additional course in integrated math and science. ELLs are supported in their other content area course through grade team meetings. Each grade team meets twice a week for 100 minutes a week. Each ENL teacher is assigned to one grade team, and shares ENL strategies and targeted supports for ELL students at that grade level. The ENL department meets twice a month to discuss and plan how these supports can be aligned across grade levels and across content areas, and these discussions and plans are shared with the grade team meetings, along with best ELL practices and effective scaffolds, etc. The langauge of these supports for the most part is English, although many home language supports are also included as needed to assist comprehension. We have three bilingual ENL teachers, and one bilingual ENL/special education teacher with a bilingual extention who can provide home language supports and select appropriate Spanish content area materials. 5  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have implemented small group ENL Literacy classes to provide additional support for struggling ELLs in hopes of narrowing the achievement gap. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are included in all after school prgrams. The after school program provided to middle school students is staffed by bilingual staff members. After school tutorials led by CHAH teachers are available to ELLs as well. There is also an after school ENL program that meets twice a week that supports the academic and learning needs of ELL.s 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. As described above, we currently use a web-based literacy program, ReadingPlus. We also use Newsela to provide lexiled, engaging current events articles with Common Core aligned question sets and writing activities. These are used for all levels of ELLs, as the programs are individually differentiated. We also use, as described several times above, the National Geographics Learning Edge and Inside programs, and the I-Ready Math program. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program, the home langauge supports are included as needed to assist comprehension. We have also have four bilingual ENL teachers. All ENL teachers provide native language supports when needed in the integrated classrooms they teach in. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELL students are placed in the appropriate grade level for their age with age appropriate peers. Support materials such as Edge and Inside are at the appropriate readability level, but are created to be relevant and engaging grade appropriate content. Newsela and ReadingPlus contain grade level material that is lexiled to meet the instructional level of the student. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ENL coordinators along with our Parent Coordinator provide orientations to the school, aided by bilingual student volunteers from student government or the NYC Detectives Club (a student-led leadership club on campus). Students are enrolled as soon as possible in the appropriate ENL classes. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish. We currently only have Spanish as a LOTE at CHAH. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 6  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers will attend PD of their choice offered through the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support. Throughout the year, all staff will receive ELL specific training to ensure that the families of our ELL students receive the highest quality education and the feel welcome and supported at CHAH. Our support staff (secretary, parent coordniator, etc.) will attend PD on "Attendance, Testing an ELL's: Parent Engagement. Adminstrators will attend PD on "Cultural Awareness and Social History" of our ELL population. The ENL teachers and other CHAH content area teachers will also be provided professional development in ENL strategies through a partnership between the Teaching Residents Program at Teachers College, Columbia University and CHAH. These monthly professional development opportunities will be offered once a month from 2:50 - 3:30pm. These professional development sessions will be focused on meeting the needs of ELLs in the content areas of science, math, social studies, and language arts, using the new New Language Arts Progressions developed through the Bilingual Common Core Initiative as a guide to help plan strategies and scaffolds that are appropriate for the language progression of the English learner students (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding or commanding). The ENL department meets twice a month to discuss and plan how ENL supports can be aligned across grade levels and across content areas, and these discussions and plans are shared with the grade team meetings, along with best ELL practices and effective scaffolds, and that are also informed by New Language Arts Progressions. In this way each content area teacher is provided with targeted PD in ENL strategies that meet the needs of the ELLs in their classes. Finally, the ENL coordinators are trained in offering professional development in ENL strategies to content area teachers. They attend grade team meetings twice a year to each grade team, providing PD in ENL strategies and offers to plan with content area teachers to meet the needs of their ELLs. The ENL teachers have been learning about the New York State Bilingual Common Core Initiative through professional development offered through the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support and the New York State Association for Bilingual Education. The Bilingual Common Core Progressions explain how the Common Core Learning Standards can be applied to ELLs who are at a variety of proficiency levels. Since all of CHAH teachers teach ELLs, professional development that is offered that is ELL specific includes references and connections to the New York State Bilingual Common Core Progressions because they help teachers see what student work at a variety of ELL proficiencies looks like, and they help teachers know how to challenge ELLs appropriately to meet their learning needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Since CHAH is a 6-12 community school, we are able to assist ELLs as they transition to high school by introducing them to their new high school teachers, by meeting with these teachers to help them understand the ELLs and their needs. We do this every year at the beginning of the year and as is needed through the school year to help the students adjust. Ninth graders can easily go down and visit their old middle school teachers, and since our ENL department spans both middle and high school we often talk about the incoming students and their needs to make sure that they are adjusting appropriately. To ensure appropriate and ongoing access to support systems, our guidance counselors and clinical social worker will attend PD on "How to create an ELL-Specific Action Plan." This action plan involves all members of the school community as it addresses the needs of our ELL population and will ensure that our ELL students and their families are in constant 7  communication with staff throughout the transition process and are made aware of their child's progress. To keep records of the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2, the principal Mark House and the ENL department chair keep records of all professional development that is offered that is dedicated to language acquisition, ENL strategies, and content instruction for ELLs. Both detailed agendas and attendance lists are kept. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides annual meetings with parents of ELLs by setting up these meetings in the CHAH Parent Communication Center CHAH PCC). in the ENL Department Room. One of our five certified ENL teachers (Yesenia Morel, Migdalia Guinis, Brent Waligory, Leah Werner, and Rebecca Stanton) will conduct the annual parent meeting with the student’s parent or guardian. Four of these teachers are fluent in Spanish (Yesenia Morel, Migdalia Guinis, Rebecca Stanton, and Emily Doscher), so the interview can be conducted in Spanish if the parent prefers. If the parent speaks another language, we will use the Language Access Kit provided by the DOE to identify the prefered language of the parent, and then will access the services of the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit to help us conduct the interview in the preferred language of the parent. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator's role is to act liaison between parents and administration and to perform outreach as a means of developing an active, engaged parent community. The Parent Coordinator will also schedule workshops for parents and mobilize community resources so that we have an effective, fully functioning Community School. A parent orientation for parent of new incoming ELLs and all returning ELLs is held at the beginning of each October. A morning and evening session is held to allow all parents an opportunity to attend. At this meeting parents are informed about the CHAH ENL program, NYSESLAT and NYSISTELL testing, the CHAH ENL after school program, and strategies they can use to support their child's language learning and academic success. The ENL department also holds bimonthly parent engagement meetings based on the self-identified needs of the ELL parent community. This ELL parent engagement meeting is facilitated by the ENL department chair and will be held bimonthly on Wednesday evenings. The ENL department sends out a monthly ELL Parent Engagement Newsletter, covering topics relevant to the parents of English language learners, such as supporting ELLs in the content areas, supporting ELLs with academic vocabulary, helping ELLs to prepare for the NYSESLAT and other high stakes tests, helping ELLs to adapt to new school environments and cultures, and oral language fluency. The parents of ELLs are also invited to all of the other numerous parent envolvement activities roganized through the Parent Outreach Office, such as the monthly PTA meetings and the monthly parent workshops. CHAH employs third party translators who are present for all parent teacher conferences and parent meetings. All documents are translated prior to being sent or backpacked home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8  9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mark House, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Community Health Academy School DBN: 06M346 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mark House Title Principal David Falciani Assistant Principal Ann Marie Vasquez Parent Coordinator Leah Werner-Evans ENL/Bilingual Teacher Deborah Mendez Parent Nancy Dooley Teacher/Subject Area Yessenia Morel Teacher/Subject Area Kirsten Svenson Rebecca Stanton Coach Coach Randy Bowen School Counselor Donald Conyers Jocelyn Santana Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/14/17 9/14/17 9/14/17 9/14/17 9/14/17 9/14/17 9/14/17 9/14/17 9/14/17 9/14/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 3  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 4 
