 02M419 School Name: LANDMARK HIGH SCHOOL Principal: CARON PINKUS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Landmark High School 02M419 02m419 9-12 School Number (DBN): 351 W. 18 th Street, New York, NY 10011 212-647-7410 212-647-7416 Phone Number: Fax: Caron Pinkus cpinkus@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Caron Pinkus Naomi Hawkins Gina Ortiz Atashia Serrano Mariel Abreu ValleryRosario Shaila Donate N/A District Information Kathy Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, NY krehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718.923.5181 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.935.5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Caron Pinkus Naomi Hawkins AtashiaSerrano Liz Rivera Lourdes Lebron ValleryRosario Shaila Donate Fred Schaefer Gjevahire Shala MarielAbreu *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Signature (Blue Ink)   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview Landmark High School is a collaborative and diverse community of learners. We employ a project-based curriculum to prepare students to be successful in all aspects of college and their careers. We nourish a strong sense of community through advisory and encourage independence, mastery, and empowerment. Our goal is for students to graduate ready to navigate the world and succeed in future endeavors.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT The school’s professional development plan is focused on our school-wide goals of improving our assessment practices, using data to inform our instruction, monitoring and increasing student progress through the inquiry team structure, and strengthening school culture by increasing student voice and rolling out Restorative Justice initiatives. In addition to the full-staff professional development that we have spelled out on the goals and objectives document, we have implemented a tiered professional development program to better meet our teachers’ individual needs. We have various layers of PD occurring on a weekly or monthly basis, as follows: ● Department PD : Department meetings take place during common prep periods throughout the week. Department teams have worked on aligning curriculum maps to the Common Core Learning Standards, providing feedback on curriculum plans using the Tuning protocol, and doing rounds of inter-visitation, using a Looking at Student Work protocol. In this way, department members have the opportunity to learn from and provide feedback to one another. Department teams have also begun the process of vertically aligning their curricula to ensure that there is consistency and an upward spiral in rigor from 9 th through 12 th grades. ● Inquiry Teams : After analyzing data, inquiry teams choose a focus question for their yearly work, and are in the process of following the phases of the inquiry process to ensure that students make progress towards the learning targets and long-term goals. ● Grade Level Teams: Grade teams meet every week to work on creating and revisiting action plans for struggling students. ● Formal and Informal Observation Conferences : Teacher feedback is provided frequently. Feedback is purposeful, actionable, and aligned to the teacher’s professional goals as well as school-wide PD goals. Observations and feedback are conducted by the principal, assistant principal, instructional coach, literacy consultant, and math coach/consultant from Metamorphosis. ● Leadership Teams : Administrators meet twice per month with both grade team leaders and department team leaders for collaborative problem solving, using protocols to look at student work, sharing feedback on the progress of certain school-wide goals, and re-visiting action plans for meeting our goals. ● Network and Citywide PD : In order to further meet teachers’ varying and individual needs, we will also continue linking individual teachers and administrators to network and citywide PD opportunities. Teachers have attended various network and citywide PD sessions over the past year, including a series on Integrated Co-Teaching and meeting the needs of students with disabilities. Some highlights, strengths, and special features of our school include: College Readiness: Landmark is a small, college-preparatory high school committed to high standards and personalized attention for all of our students. Our teachers employ a variety of instructional strategies in order to prepare our students for college. A typical day in one of our classrooms may include inquiry, debate, collaborative learning, and small group instruction. Teachers work collaboratively in department teams to plan rigorous, engaging, 0  college-preparatory units, and provide feedback to one another on curriculum. They also continuously work to improve and refine the PBAT (performance based assessment task) process, in which students have to research a topic extensively, write a college-like term paper, and present their topic to a committee of teachers. Additionally, our full-time college counselor works closely with all seniors to help students select colleges and complete the application process. Our college counselor also works with our underclassmen to ensure that they understand what they need to accomplish each year in order to be accepted to the college of their choice. She plans college trips to a variety of colleges and universities to help expose all students to different types of schools. The entire junior class attends an overnight college trip each spring as well as day trips throughout the school year, and our freshman and sophomore classes attend day trips to various colleges as well. Our college counselor attends frequent professional development sessions through CUNY and CACNY, as well as with individual private universities. These sessions allow her to build relationships with admissions officers as well as to stay up to date on scholarships and other opportunities for our students. She also frequently brings speakers into the school to talk to students about academic programs, scholarship opportunities, and college life. Last year, we had speakers from Dartmouth, SUNY and CUNY, the Quest Bridge Program, and the Black Male Initiative, among others. Lastly, we have expanded our relationship with College Now programs at John Jay and Baruch. During the spring semester last year, thirty of our juniors and seniors received college credit through College Now courses at these two CUNY schools. This semester, we not only have students enrolled and taking courses at the schools, but we also have a professor from Baruch who teaches a College Now Anthropology course here at Landmark. Because of our college-preparatory nature, we are proud that 100 percent of our seniors are in the process of applying to college. The college counselor is working with them closely on their application process. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We serve a high-needs student population. This includes approximately 23% students with disabilities, more than 90% free and reduced-price lunch, 9% English language learners, and approximately 70% of students are reading below grade level. Additionally, our annual attendance rate is 83%. Literacy remediation is a significant need. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One key challenge that we face is that serve a high-needs student population. This includes approximately 23% students with disabilities, more than 90% free and reduced-price lunch, 9% English language learners, and approximately 70% of students are reading below grade level, as per the Performance Series reading assessment that we use school-wide. Additionally, our annual attendance rate is 83%. As a result of the high needs student population, it makes even more important the need for Strong Family-Community Ties. Our parent coordinator has made great strides in terms of increasing communication with families and increasing parent involvement in school events and students' academic progress, as per sign in sheets from parent events. The areas that we made the most growth in last year were Collaborative Teachers and Supportive Environment, as we continued to strengthen our team structures as well as our restorative practices school-wide, according to the School Survey. The area that we will focus on most this year is Rigorous Instruction. This includes continued work to refine and strengthen our PBAT and mini-PBAT process and our school-wide literacy initiative of Reading Partnerships. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M419 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 348 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 3 4 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 82.5% % Reduced Lunch 6.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 59.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.16 4% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 76% 0% 60.0% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 138 133 81.8% 5.5% 23.3% 33.3% 3.2% 1.7% 4 36% 6.1 N/A N/A 8% 0% 61.4% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The instructional leadership team, including the principal, assistant principal, instructional coach and consultant work with teachers to align curricula to the Common Core Learning Standards. In June, we collected year-long curriculum maps from all teachers for the following school year. The instructional leadership team met to review sample maps and plans from each department area, and to norm our feedback. We then met individually with each teacher to give feedback on their curriculum maps and unit plans. For teachers who work together in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) partnerships, we met with the partner teachers together to not only give feedback on the level of rigor and alignment to CCLS, but also to give feedback on ICT models that we would like to see present in the classroom and ideas for differentiation strategies to ensure that all students are cognitively engaged. Depending on the teacher’s level of need, we then held follow-up planning meetings with various teachers throughout October to model backwards planning, co-plan rigorous assessment tasks, and to model individual lessons. We promote higher order thinking skills through our ongoing discussions and feedback with teachers regarding the level of rigor we see in their classrooms. Our community defines rigor as students using their minds well; the students are doing the lion’s share of the thinking during each class. As part of the Consortium and the Coalition of Essential Schools, we value depth over breadth in curriculum planning. In other words, we believe that rigor is evidenced in students’ deeply analyzing and exploring the content, rather than superficially covering a wider range of topics. As proof of their depth of thinking, our students complete and present four major Performance-Based Assessments during their four years in high school. As instructional leaders in the school, our ongoing work is to help teachers continue to increase the level of rigor in the classroom. This remains at the heart of our regular feedback to teachers. After department meetings and individual meetings regarding curriculum maps, as well as feedback from the IIT State Review, administration and staff became increasingly aware of the need for using school-wide instructional methods across grades and content areas. We would like to prioritize the implementation of these instructional practices school-wide in order to raise the level of rigor and engagement. We are prioritizing Reading Partnerships as our school-wide literacy initiative. To this end, we have joined the Learning Partners Program, and have developed our school-wide PD calendar to ensure that all teachers receive adequate training in the reading partnership protocol and literacy instructional methods that go along with the protocol. Through our reading partnerships protocols, students in every class are strategically paired up based on assessment data. In pairs, students challenge themselves and each other to monitor their comprehension as they read and collaboratively make sense of difficult text. 3  School-wide we are using the Performance Series Reading Test to measure baseline, mid-year, and end of year reading scores for all students. Teachers are able to give feedback to students based on their growth on this exam, as well as ongoing in-class assessments. Our goal targets our 9th graders who are reading below grade level. Last year, we did not meet our goal. With additional interventions this year, including a literacy elective class for all 9th graders and more targeted professional development for all teachers, we feel confident that we can achieve our goal this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of ninth graders in “tier 2” (5th -8th grade reading level) will make at least one level of progress on the school-wide reading assessment as a result of meaningful reading partnerships in core content classes, more detailed assessments, and targeted literacy PD for all teachers. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators and instructional coaches and consultants tailor in-class coaching, modeling, and feedback bi-monthly to help strengthen teachers’ instructional practices, specifically focused on the successful implementation of reading partnerships and assessment practices to help improve reading levels for all students, including ELLs and SWDs. PD series on reading partnership protocols, writing clear learning objectives, and formative assessment of student progress to take place during weekly Wednesday PD time Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept-June Admin Literacy coach Instructional consultants All teachers Sept-June Admin Literacy coach Instructional consultants Admin, literacy coach, model teachers Admin, parent coordinator, all teachers We will participate in the Learning Partners Program to learn about the assessment practices used by two other schools; school visits take place monthly We will hold workshops and informational sessions for parents and families to inform them of the purpose and impact of reading partnerships. This will also be included in the family newsletter, and discussed at Parent teacher conferences three times per year. Admin, literacy coach, model teachers Parents and families Sept-June Sept-June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our parent coordinator will communicate closely with parents. We will have a literacy-focused PTA night in November led by assistant principal of curriculum and instruction to inform parents of strategies they can use at home to help their children improve reading comprehension. We will also send letters home to parents, and advisors will make phone calls to inform parents of their students' reading scores three times per year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5  Tax Levy funds; funding for administrators, professional development; funding for full time literacy coach. Literacy coach, assistant principal, and principal will each work with a caseload of teachers to complete weekly informal observations and provide teachers with individualized, actionable feedback to strengthen assessment practices. 9th and 10th grade students will take a literacy elective two days per week, rather than choosing froma range of electives. We will not need schedule adjustments to support implementation of this plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will measure mid-year growth in January and would like to see that at least 65% of our sub-group of students have made at least a half year's growth on the Performance Series reading assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Performance Series Reading Assessment or New York Performance series Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In order to create and maintain a safe and supportive environment at the school, we have focused on strengthening advisory practices specifically restorative circles, increasing student voice, and implementing a peer mediation program. Some examples of our efforts and strengths are as follows: ● We designated a Restorative Coordinator to continue previous work done with consultant from Morningside Center and Expanded Success initiative to improve advisory practices, restorative circle practices, and restorative conversations. ● Our college advisor and one teacher continue to facilitate the peer mentoring program ● We raised student voice through Restorative Justice initiative, by recruiting and training peer mediators, peer mentors, and including students in Restorative Justice Professional Development sessions ● Our Restorative Justice team, consisting of eight teachers, trained the staff in facilitating restorative circles, and facilitated 12 PD sessions with the staff throughout the school year; the RJ team attended a PD series through ESI called Culturally Responsive Educators Rising, and will facilitate PD this year with the staff on culturally relevant teaching practices ● We partnered with the Morningside Center through a grant from Expanded Success Initiative. A group of 8 admin, teachers, and staff members collaborated over several sessions as the Equity Team and planned two full day Equity trainings for the staff  The RJ coordinator and an RJ team member started the RJ advisory, and trained students to lead community building circles with their peers; RJ advisees facilitated six peer circles in their buddy advisories over the course of the year; we will increase the frequency of peer-led circles this year to one per month.  We received a well developed rating on our 2017-2018 Quality Review in the area of school culture Our primary needs in this area are to continue to reduce the number of punitive interventions like suspensions and to increase feelings of safety and order in the school. We believe that this is an area of need for two reasons: ● In 2017-18, we reduced the number of suspensions by approximately 10%. We know that we need to continue to reduce that number. 7  In 2017-18, our annual attendance was 82%. We know that we need to continue to increase that number. In 2017-18, 84% of students stated that they feel safe in their classes and other parts of the school. We would like to increase this to 90% for this school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase attendance by 2% as compared to 2017-2018 by using restorative measures, including community building advisory circles, restorative conversations, and peer mediation. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● We will designate a Restorative Coordinator to continue previous work done with consultant from Morningside Center to improve advisory practices in order to build trust and positive relationships among students, and between teachers and students 1. Our restorative coordinator and lead RJ teacher team member will run the RJ advisory; students will be trained and will facilitate community building circles in their buddy advisories monthly; students will be trained and facilitate peer mediation sessions when conflicts arise between their peers We will maintain and expand our Restorative Justice team of teachers, who will participate in summer PD and planning sessions. RJ team will facilitate PD with teachers throughout the school year on restorative circle practices and culturally responsive education weekly during our Wednesday PD Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept-June Admin Sept-June Advisory coordinator Principal RJ coordinator All students Sept-June Admin Sept-June RJ coordinator All teachers Sept-June Admin, RJ team Sept-June Admin, RJ team We will develop and maintain a school-wide system to collect and track data three times per year on student social and emotional developmental health and academic development in order to track the effectiveness of our restorative interventions. all students Sept-June Sept-June Admin, Restorative coordinator, counselors Admin, RJ coordinator, counselors 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Advisors will make weekly phone calls to parents during contractual parent engagement time to inform them of their child's attendance. Our pupil personnel secretary will send letters home to parents monthly to inform them of their attendance that month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy; funding for professional development; per session for teacher leaders to plan six PD sessions per semester. Administrators and restorative justice teacher leaders will meet twice per month after school to plan professional development and monitor progress of initiatives. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor progress by evaluating attendance data every quarter. We will evaluate quarterly attendance data to ensure that we are up at least 2%, year over year. In the 2017-18 year, we had 82% attendance for the year. In order to meet our goal, we should have approximately 84% attendance each quarter. We will monitor progress mid-way through the school year by seeing if we have 84% YTD attendance in February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS RSAL report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have several structures in place to promote a culture of professional collaboration and distributive leadership at our school and we received a Proficient rating on our 2017-18 Quality Review in the area of Collaborative Teachers. For example, each grade team and department team has a teacher leader. Administrators meet twice per month with grade team leaders, focusing on making school-wide decisions that impact school culture, including decisions about advisory curricula, Restorative Justice practices, school-wide instructional practices, and school-wide events. Administrators also meet twice per month with the department team leaders, focusing on making school-wide decisions that impact student learning. Department team leaders currently lead their colleagues in inquiry projects, specifically focused on raising student progress on PBATs and mini-PBATs. By engaging in inquiry teams, all teachers are able to choose a range of target students and to measure their progress in terms of the key skills and learning targets related to the particular area of focus. If students make progress in these key skills and learning targets, then we feel confident that they will be more successful in their classes overall. Teachers chose their departmental focus skill based on the previous year’s student data as well as their own classroom observations. They looked closely at the areas students struggled with most on PBATs and Regents, as well as the Common Core standards and research on what is needed most for success in college, and they selected their focus skill based on that information. Each department team meets twice per month during a common planning period. The school schedule is designed so that all department teams have common preps every day. As part of the inquiry process, teachers have created or are in the process of creating a department-wide rubric to measure the progress of their target population on their particular area of focus; teachers will measure and track student progress at regular intervals throughout the school year. Additionally, teachers will engage in three rounds of inter-visitation or Japanese lesson study within their departments to share best practices and refine instructional strategies to increase student achievement. As part of these rounds, teachers will analyze their data by collaboratively looking at student work, reading professional text, and refining instructional practices accordingly. As per our own evaluation and feedback on our 2017-18 Quality Review, the priority need in this area is to ensure that teachers use interim assessments, specifically student performance on mini-PBATs, to inform lesson planning and unit planning to ensure that all students make progress towards meeting standards on graduation-level PBATs in the 11th and 12th grades. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  By June 2019, 80% of students will pass their core subject mini-PBATs as per the Consortium rubric as a result of meaningful inquiry team work and Looking at Student Work protocols in all core subject department teams. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Admin and instructional coaches facilitate ongoing PD series on stages of the inquiry process and meet with inquiry team leaders 2x/month to check inquiry team progress Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept-June Admin Instructional Coaches/ consultants Admin; inquiry team leaders Admin; inquiry team leaders ● Inquiry teams measure and track target student progress three times per year All teachers Sept-June ● Teachers engage in two rounds of inter-visitation and/or lesson study within their inquiry teams to share best practices All teachers Jan-June All teachers participate in a mid-year and end of year "share fair" to share salient learnings from their inquiry work All teachers Feb, June Admin, inquiry team leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will send calendar/newsletter home monthly to parents to inform them of upcoming mini-PBATs. Advisors will make phone calls to parents three times per year to inform them of their child's progress and performance on the mini-PBATs. Admin will collect phone logs to monitor this outreach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy, title 1 funding; professional development; coverages for inter-visitations and lesson study. Inquiry teams will meet during regularly scheduled professional development time to research, co-plan, examine student work, debrief inter-visitations, and monitor student progress. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All departmental teams will administer and score quarterly mini-PBAT assessments to gauge student progress based on the team’s rubric. By February 2019, 80% of students will be on track to pass core subject mini-PBATs, based on our internal tracker and the Consortium PBAT rubrics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Internal mini-PBAT score tracker; Consortium PBAT rubrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STARS Data from 2015-16 showed that 72% of students were on track to accumulate 10 or more credits for the year and 75% of students were on track to pass grade-level PBATs. The school leader held three "State of the School" meetings at regular intervals throughout the school year to collaboratively review data, monitor progress towards meeting goals, and make suggestions for improvement in the upcoming quarter. Credit accumulation statistics have gone up consistently from year to year based on STARS data. In 2017-18, 77% of students were on track to accumulate 10 or more credits by June, with 10% additional students who were on track to accumulate 10 or more credits by August. Feedback from our IIT State Review: The priority needs that will be addressed by the goal are as follows: The school leader should: ● articulate definitive, clear, and high expectations for the current student population at Landmark High School; ● develop, in collaboration with staff, SMART goals for attendance and student academic proficiency ● track and share progress towards these goals throughout the school year with all members of the Landmark High School community including parents, students, school support staff, teachers, and school leaders. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019, 80% of students will be on target for accumulating ten or more credits per year and for passing their grade level PBATs. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School leaders will share SMART goals with all school constituents at the beginning of school year 2018-19, get feedback, revise goals, and hold quarterly meetings to review progress. Goals will be posted in a public space within the school All school constituents Sept-June Admin School leaders will facilitate "State of the School" meetings with all staff at the end of each semester to analyze data and track progress towards meeting goals Teachers, advisors, admin Jan, June Admin Advisors will hold quarterly conferences with their advisees to review progress towards meeting the goal Guidance counselors and advisors will hold parent meetings for students who are falling off track four times per year, schedule students for after school tutoring, and Saturday Academy if necessary Advisors Sept-June Admin counselors, advisors Sept-June Admin 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold parent teacher conferences four times throughout the year to inform parents of their child's progress towards meeting these graduation requirements. The parent coordinator and guidance counselor will co-plan and facilitate a PTA night focused on graduation requirements. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy, title 1 funding; Admin will share progress towards goals with staff during regularly scheduled professional development time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 1, 2019, school leaders will have held the first State of the School meeting to track student progress towards meeting these goals. 80% of students will be on target for accumulating ten or more credits per year and for passing their grade level PBATs, as per STARS data and first semester PBAT scores. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS data on credit accumulation, First semester PBAT scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We received a proficient rating on our 2017-18 Quality Review in the area of communicating high expectations to families. The following is a summary of our efforts to increase our communication with families, communicate high expectations to families, and establish partnerships with families to support students’ progress towards college and career readiness: ● Jupiter Grades, Remind 101, and Automated messenger allow teachers and staff to update parents on student progress via digital platforms ● Advisors call home weekly to report on academic progress and attendance. Call logs are shared with administration in order to coordinate communication between parents, students, advisors, outside agencies and the attendance team. ● Parent meetings are scheduled regularly for students of concern in addition to parent-teacher conferences ● College counselor holds college information workshops with parents on topics including college application process, financial aid forms, and reviews college options that would be the best fit for individual students ● College counselor and parent coordinator co-plan college day trips and overnight trips, and invite parents to participate with their students ● School Leadership Team meets monthly to discuss school-wide goals and create action plans to address a particular goal ● PTA meets monthly; Parent Coordinator arranges outside speakers to attend these meetings to address issues that parents identify as important, including cyber-safety, drug and alcohol awareness, and college application process; Parent coordinator meets monthly with PTA president to reflect on and revise parent involvement initiatives Our priority area/ next steps in this area are to increase the number of parents involved in all workshops, family events, PTA meetings, curricular exhibitions, and student PBAT committees. We aspire to have a greater parent voice in the leadership at Landmark, and we are currently working with our SLT to increase parent involvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal 9  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase parent involvement at school-wide events, including conferences, curricular exhibitions, volunteer work, and PTA meetings by 10% compared to the previous school year based on sign-in sheets at school events. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administrators meet twice per month with grade team leaders to discuss strategies for strengthening communication with families; Strategies are put in place immediately following the planning meeting and are followed up at the next meeting School Leadership Team meets once per month and brainstorms strategies and devises an action plan to increase parent engagement; Action plan will be put in place following each meeting and will be followed up at the next month's meeting Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents and families Sept -June Admin, grade team leaders Parents and families Sept-June Admin, SLT Partner organizations, including the Midori Foundation and Hudson Sailing, will invite parents to concerts and exhibitions. Parents and families Sept-June CBO staff PBAT teachers and advisors will invite parents to participate in PBAT activities, such as the annual science fair and math night, as well as to sit on PBAT committees for their children Parents and families February - June Admin, PBAT teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Hudson Guild; College Access 4 All Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax levy, Title 1; funding for parent coordinator and community associate; funding for PTA and SLT meetings; funding for translation services Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will review and analyze the data regarding number of parents participating in parent-teacher conferences, PTA meetings, curricular exhibitions, and school-wide events for the first half of the school year. By February 2019, we will see a 5% increase in parent participation at school-wide events, as compared to 2017-18. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets from all parent events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) School-wide reading assessments; departmental diagnostics; Regents exam scores Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Departmental diagnostics; PBAT scores Departmental diagnostics; PBAT scores Departmental diagnostics; PBAT scores Credit accumulation; Social emotional challenges or demonstration of at-risk behavior Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group During school and after school Small group Small group Small group During school and after school During school and after school During school and after school Small group, one-to-one During school and after school Small group targeted reading intervention classes for ELLs, SWD, and students scoring 6th grade level or below on the reading assessment; English Regents prep classes College essay writing workshop Credit recovery PBAT support workshop; Credit recovery PBAT support workshop; Credit recovery PBAT support workshop; Credit recovery Academic advising; counseling with school guidance counselor, SPARK counselor or youth development consultant 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 6 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Access to social emotional counseling, advisory support, supplies and materials Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To ensure that staff is highly qualified, we follow a number of steps. In terms of recruitment, the hiring committee, which is made up of administrators and highly qualified teachers, reviews resumes and interviews teaching candidates together. We then ask the candidates with the highest scores on the interview process to come in for a demonstration lesson. Again, the hiring committee meets to review our notes on the demo lessons, and we then check references from former supervisors. At that point, we make collaborative decisions on hiring. To recruit highly qualified teachers, we use the Consortium communication listserv, attend job fairs, post on grad school message boards, and use the Open market system. We also do several things in order to retain highly qualified teachers. We foster team structures to ensure that our staff is collaborative and part of a professional community focused on improving instructional practices and student achievement. To retain staff, we also help foster leadership capacity in our teachers so that they can develop a variety of professional skills. We make it a priority to conduct frequent formal and informal observations in order to give ongoing feedback to teachers and ensure that they feel successful with their professional growth. To maximize teacher effectiveness, we also make strategic decisions around teacher assignments. Teachers are paired up so that all have a collaborative partner with whom to plan and refine curriculum. Integrated co-teaching pairs remain the same so that teachers can build an ongoing professional relationship with their co-teacher. Lastly, some teachers are selected to “loop” with their students; that is, they teach the same students for two years in a row. In that way, they get to know their students’ strengths and weaknesses extremely well, and are better able to hone in on support structures. The principal and assistant principals work in collaboration with the Consortium to ensure high quality professional development for the teachers. We facilitate professional development at the school weekly, specifically focusing on areas of need based on the previous quality review, progress report, and learning environment survey. For the 2015-16 school year, our professional development plan includes a focus on three strands: school-wide instructional practices, inquiry team work, and restorative justice practices. In addition to the professional development that we facilitate at the school, we also send teachers to participate in PD outside the school, including Consortium conferences and workshops, Teachers College workshops, and PBAT committees at other schools, among other opportunities that arise. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 6  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As mentioned above, the principal and assistant principals work in collaboration with the Consortium to ensure high quality professional development for the teachers. We facilitate professional development at the school weekly with the full staff, and department teams also meet at least once a week. We also send teachers from each department to outside PD on a regular basis, including the Coalition of Essential School national forum, the Consortium teacher moderation study, Affinity group PD workshops, Learning Partners Program, and NCTE, just to name a few. Additionally, we hired a literacy coach, math coach, and a literacy consultant to work with teachers to improve their curriculum planning, instructional practices, level of rigor in the classroom, and specific strategies for meeting the needs of students with disabilities and ELLs. Coaches work weekly with a select group of teachers, to observe their practice, give feedback, and conduct model lessons. The assistant principal and principal provide individualized professional development to teachers through our system of frequent informal observations and feedback cycles. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All teachers meet once or twice per week in department teams. During these meetings, teachers create assessments for their inquiry project and evaluate student work according to the rubric. Team leaders meet twice per month with administrators to review assessments and student progress, and engage in a professional dialogue regarding next steps for the team. Department teams also use their meeting times to revise and refine performance based 7  assessment tasks, including the gateway PBATs as well as the graduation requirements. Through these department team meetings, all teachers make collaborative decisions regarding inquiry assessments and PBAT revisions . 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 314,890.00 0 11,200.00 0 2,243,070.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 8   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Landmark High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Landmark will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Landmark High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 3  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 4  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 5  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name Landmark High School Borough Manhattan School Number 419 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Caron Pinkus Coach Jennifer Tully ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sarah Harrington Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Kathy Pelles Assistant Principal Deborah Bryant Coach type here School Counselor Karina Simancas Parent Zinnia Alvarado Parent Coordinator Elizabeth Rivera Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 374 7 Total number of ELLs 28 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.49%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fountas and Pinnell, Performance Series reading assessment, teacher-created assessments, mini-PBATs in all core subject classes 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Coach and speech teacher pull individual students out of class during the first two weeks of school to run Fontas and Pinell testing; all students take the Performance Series reading assessment in late September at a school-wide scheduled time; mini-PBAT weeks are scheduled school-wide in November, January, and April 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Performance Series, mini-PBATs 8  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? reading intervention classes during school and after school; academic coaching in advisory 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT, ELA Regents 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Department meetings, grade team meetings, quarterly State of the School meetings Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped in grade level cohorts for integrated ENL. For stand alone classes, 11th and 12th grade are in grade level cohorts and 9th and 10th grade are in a mixed grade class. Integrated ENL is implemented in ELA classes. Stand alone classes are heterogeneous and students are pulled for this class from elective periods. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher and principal work together to program all ENL students according to the policy guide to ensure that all students receive the correct number of instructional minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All core content classes are delivered in English with scaffolding for ENL students based on the SIOP model; in both integrated and stand alone ENL we use a workshop model to ensure a significant amount of independent practice and individual teacher-student conference time 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As we do not have any entering level ELLs, all ELLs are evaluated in English throughout the year. 9  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate as follows: a. Additional tutoring sessions with ENL teacher and consultations with core content teachers b. More periods per week as per policy guidelines as well as additioanl tutoring and buddy system c. Integrated services in content classes, plus literacy support class with ENL teacher d. Integrated services; literacy support if needed e. Continue to receive at least 90 integrated minutes, plus literacy support as needed 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies: writing frames, sentence starters, visuals, graphic organizers, additional vocabulary support, word attack skills, annotated texts Grade-level materials accessed through scaffolds such as partner reading, guided reading, annotated texts, and additional literacy support 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL SWDs at all language levels are provided some integrated content support; we do not restrict students to a self-contained setting. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ENL teacher works closely with content teachers during planning periods to integrate ENL support and literacy support strategies into all content classes. ENL teacher and instructional coach also offer small group literacy intervention classes during the school day. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on literacy scores, we have created a reading intervention class for our 11th graders in addition to the class taught to our 9th and 10th grade struggling readers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs, included advisory program, elective classes, clubs and activities, reading intervention classes where necessary, etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Leveled texts, annotated texts, translation only as needed for beginner ELLs 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We do not provide home language support for our students; translation is provided for family meetings if necessary 0  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs are grouped by grade level and resources/curriculum is planned according to common core state standards 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are co-located but we do not share resources for our ENL programs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have parent night and a summer bridge program for all incoming freshmen and new students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? American Sign Language 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our professional development plan is centered around our school-wide literacy initiative; this includes differentiation strategies for ELLs, SWDs, and students with varying reading abilities. Additionally, our ENL teacher meets with certain core subject area teachers in order to give them feedback on planning curriculum and instruction with the needs of our ELLs in mind. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our professional development plan is centered around our school-wide literacy initiative; this includes differentiation strategies for ELLs, SWDs, and students with varying reading abilities. Agendas are maintained for all meetings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We hold mid-year conferences with all parents and provide translation services if necessary. 1  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We host several parent events, including a welcome breakfast, holiday dinner, concert, and a science fair; all parents are invited. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Caron Pinkus, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Landmark High School School DBN: 02m419 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Caron Pinkus Siu Chan Liz Rivera Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Sarah Harrington ENL/Bilingual Teacher Gina Ortiz Parent Jon Christensen/ ELA Teacher/Subject Area Gianna Lundy/ SS Teacher/Subject Area Jenny Tully/ Coach Jenny Tully Coach Coach Guinelle Williams School Counselor Kathy Rehfield Jocelyn Santana N/A n/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member field support Other n/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/08/17 09/08/17 09/08/17 09/08/17 09/08/17 09/08/17 09/08/17 09/08/17 9/8/17 09/08/17 9/8/17 9/8/17 n/A n/a n/a 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02m419 School Name: Landmark High School Superintendent: Kathy Rehfield- The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We assess language preferences for the parent community by pulling the data from the Home Language Survey, emergency blue card, ATS, and our internal school survey. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Spanish Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 5  French Mandarin 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The following documents will be distributed: Parent Welcome Letter (Sept), Parent Teacher Association & School Leadership Elections (June), School Year Calendar (August), Incoming Ninth Grade Family Orientation (June), Curriculm Night (Sept), Parent Breakfast (Sept), Parent Teacher Conferences (4 times per year), Regents Week Letter (Jan and June), Schoolwide Attendance (how to understand RISA in details) (throughout the school year), Parent Volunteer Opportunites (Oct), Resources and Workshops for Parents and students (Oct), Jupiter Grade Login Information for child academic progress throughout the year (August), Remind Text Messaging Service (Oct), NYState Testing dates (Sept), College Information Session and updates (Oct). 6  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum Night (Sept), Student Academic Progress (4 times per year), PTC (4 times per year), PTA (once per month), SLT (once per month), College night (Oct); On an individual basis: Annual reviews, Attendance Concerns, Special Opportunities for Programs, Social/Emotional Growth Issues. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Letter mailed home to parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Fill out a short survey during schoolwide events or during one on one meetings. 7 
