 02M420 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONS AND HUMAN SERVICES Principal: ROBERT GENTILE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The High School for Health Professions and Human Services 310200011420 9-12 School Number (DBN): 02M420 345 East 15th Street, New York City 10003-4683 212-780-9175 Phone Number: 212-979-7261 Fax: Robert A. Gentile RGentil@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Robert A. Gentile Sebastian Natera Ericka Merriwether Loizos Karaiskos Libby Schlesinger Haley Keingstein Manfrer Espinal Fatimah Shalash District Information Vivian Orlen Superintendent: 333 7 th Avenue, Room 711, NY 10001 VOrlen@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-7563 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Manhattan FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Yuet Chu Executive Director: 333 7 th Avenue, New York, NY 10001, 8 th Floor YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-356-7564 Phone Number: 212-356-7537 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Robert A. Gentile Camila De VediaHelm Ericka Merriwether Connie Sullivan Libby Schlesinger Manfrer Espinal Haley Keingstein Fatimah Shalash Loizos Karaiskos Helen Gasser Valerie Keingstein Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/CSA Member/UFT Member/Parent   Name Angelo Martinez Jacqueline Neil Amanda Lacmanen N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/PA/PTA Vice President Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Contextual Information Section 4: CEP Overview Mission & Vision Statement: We are dedicated to providing a safe and nurturing learning environment at The High School for Health Professions and Human Services. We prepare our students to enter higher education and the world of health care by maintaining challenging academic standards and integrating education into professional settings so that they acquire scientific knowledge, ethics, integrity and compassion.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The vision of the Founding Principal of The High School for Health Professions and Human Services was to have the school located in Gramercy Park in lower Manhattan to expose students to rigorous science and math with an internship program exposing them to health careers and related services fields. Most of the students who come to The High School for Health Professions and Human Services know they will take more science courses than other high school students. At our school a large number of students graduate with 14 credits in science. To name a few, we offer courses in forensic science, nutrition, medical illustration, and medical science and research. We, as a nation, realize that the health industry is booming, and there is job growth in the health field. Our goal is to expose more of our students to employment opportunities in the health fields. Our school is dedicated to providing challenging academic standards in professional health career settings through our academic program which prepares students to enter the world of health care with scientific knowledge, ethics, integrity and compassion. Students are provided with a well-rounded high school experience including extracurricular opportunities, competitions, and sports program. We are committed to the College Now Program to promote on-site college courses offered through LaGuardia Community College and off-site college courses sponsored by Hunter College and Baruch College. We also offer Advanced Placement Classes in Biology, Calculus AB, Chemistry, English Literature and Composition, Government & Politics: Comparative, Physics B, Spanish Language and Culture, United States History, and World History. School Strengths, Accomplishments and Challenges HPHS provides students an opportunity to partner with mentors at world class organizations helping students with quality research which propels them into competitive colleges and solid career tracks. Our Community-Based Organization (Comprehensive Development, Inc.) provides a fully staffed Career & College Office. CDI advisors work closely with school staff to provide students with individualized support. While in high school, students receive free academic tutoring and test preparation. The advocacy team supports students through frequent counseling sessions, engaging parents whenever possible and connecting students with resources. We offer a full range of personalized college advisement for students and their families from college selection and application to navigating scholarships and financial aid. We organize college fairs, campus visits and connect students with alumni. Developing a career, not just landing a job, is more critical than ever for the future of New York City’s young people. Through one-on-one sessions, our Career Advisors help each student to discover their interests, strengths and create a practical career plan. We offer in-depth career exploration through internships, panel discussions with professionals, career fairs and visits to local companies like AOL, Credit Suisse and Chandler Chicco Agency so that students get first-hand exposure to a wide selection of professional fields. Our career workshops are focused on practical skills including job searching, resume writing and professional networking. At HPHS students have the opportunity to choose the three-year Science Research, two-year Medical track, or to follow an academic college preparatory course. Instructional Focus 2018-2019: If teachers provide access for all students - through culturally relevant curriculum - to take responsibility for their learning by thinking critically through reading, writing, and speaking, then students will become intellectually and emotionally engaged. This will ultimately promote greater college and career readiness amongst all students at HPHS. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  Special Student Populations and Specific Needs The Special Education population at Health Professions has grown over the years. Most of our ninth and tenth grade ICT students receive ICT classes in the four major disciplines. Our SETSS students typically receive this service once a day, for five days a week. We have a full time Speech Therapist working with our students. Currently, our guidance counselors conduct the mandated counseling sessions for those students who need it. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. AREAS OF PROGRESS OVER THE YEARS The High School for Health Professions & Human Services has a 92% graduation rate. Rigorous Instruction: All students, including ELL and students with disabilities, demonstrate higher-order thinking skills. Lessons in all content areas include tasks that require students to demonstrate their thinking in writing and in discussions in class. Lessons are planned to provide challenging material in a format accessible for all students. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school using a School-wide Inquiry Team forum, common planning time, and department meetings. The inquiry team meetings focus on implementing strategies to create academically rigorous and intellectually engaging classes for all students. Strong Family-Community Ties: Students and their families are supported by the school to succeed and meet academic expectations. Parents stated in the Quality Review interview that the school starts to prepare students for college early in their high school years and communicates frequently with parents about the progress their children make. The school has a partnership with Comprehensive Development, Inc. (CDI) to support students as they prepare for college and career. AREAS OF FOCUS 2018-2019 1. Rigorous Instruction: By June 2019, through utilization of targeted writing strategies reflective of New York State Learning Standards, students’ writing will improve as evidenced by 80% of 11th grade students scoring a three or higher on the argumentative essay as well as scoring a 3 or higher on the text analysis part included in the June 2019 English Language Arts (ELA) CCLS exam. 2. Supportive Environment: By June 2019, the survey scores in Social Emotional Learning, specifically the areas of personal attention and support, next level guidance, and press toward academic achievement will improve by 5 percent. 3. Collaborative Teachers: By June 2019, the survey scores in Quality of Professional Development will improve by 5 percent. 4. Effective Leadership: By June 2019, the teacher survey scores in Inclusive Leadership will improve from Proficient to Well Developed. 5. Strong Family Ties: By June 2019, the survey scores in Strong Family Community Ties, specifically the areas of Parent Involvement will improve by 6 percent. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M420 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1819 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 17 17 10 41 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 78 45 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 70.0% % Attendance Rate 68.3% % Reduced Lunch 5.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 53.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 7.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.08 1% 3% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 93% 90% 87.9% 41.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 239 240 9 10 90.5% 1.9% 13.0% 16.1% 21.2% 1.8% 14 14% 5.6 N/A N/A 95% 91% 94.8% 31% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YSH YES YES N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our Instructional focus was amended to include that we believe that there is a belief among the staff that students learn best when they are accountable to each other through high levels of discussion, debate and/or presentation both orally and in writing. We further believe that when teachers plan lessons together that consistently ask students to demonstrate critical thinking skills and a deep understanding of the instructional shifts we will have high quality student engagement. The Regents Analysis Tool - Workbook Report shows little growth in the students scoring a 3 or higher on the text analysis portion of the ELA Regents exam. 2. To this end, and in keeping in line with our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year, which is New York State Learning Standards aligned, we have identified the continued need to improve student writing through the use of evidence as well as student ownership through student directed formative assessment practice. SWD and ELL perform below their general education counterparts. The 2017 graduating class, S Cohort, had a graduation rate of 94% while SWD in the same Cohort had a 50% graduation rate and ELL had an 82% graduation rate. Looking at the same sub groups of students in the T-Cohort, 2018 graduates, we had a 92% graduation rate while our SWD graduation rate was 55% and ELL graduation rate was 85% -- still well below the overall graduation rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the utilization of targeted writing strategies reflective of New York State Learning Standards, students’ writing will improve as evidenced by 80% of 11th grade students scoring a three or higher on the argumentative essay as well as scoring a three or higher (total) on the text analysis part included in the June 2019 English Language Arts (ELA) CCLS exam. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). September Opening Day Focus: Improvement in Students’ Writing Abilities in Preparation for College and Career. The Principal will provide the background to the work to be done and share the Instructional Focus. Professional Development from Ben Carney, a partner and consultant with Shane Purse Associates, will provide job-embedded professional development to support teachers with implementing blended learning classrooms, including digital assessments, online learning programs and blending small-group instruction with technology to help teachers prepare students to score a 3 or higher on the ELA Regents exam. Focus classrooms: SWD and ELL Students G & R Inclusive Group LLC will provide individualized support for ICT teachers. Each instructional session will begin in the classroom with the coach observing instruction and will conclude with a post meeting in order to provide feedback for strategies and next steps. The goal is to strengthen teachers’ lesson planning, implementation of differentiated reading and writing strategies, the integration of the six co-teaching models, and the strengthening of the co-teaching relationship in an ICT Setting to help teachers prepare students to score a 3 or higher on the ELA Regents exam. Promote and encourage teacher use of Lexile Measures to differentiate instruction in the classrooms and use Lexile measurements to assign reading materials. Utilize data from Gates MacGinitie Reading Tests (GMRT) to continue to train teachers to make use of Lexile data when selecting texts and matching students to books for instructional purposes. IEP teachers will collaborate weekly with general education teachers during Common Planning Time to jointly plan lessons and assessments for students with disabilities. Parents will be invited to participate in workshops and training on Pupil Path. Pupil Path provides parents easy view of their Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September 4, 2018 Principal & Assistant Principals Teachers Weekly Shane Purse Associates Teachers Weekly G & R Inclusive Group LLC Teachers September 12-14, 2018 Assistant Principals Supervision Students Weekly Teachers using Common Planning Time Meetings Parents Parent Coordinator 4 children’s courses, assignments, handouts, transcripts, programs, attendance, and learning goals. Progress Reports will be mailed to parents on a regular basis. The school will maintain on-going communication with parents using Pupil Path, the School Messenger, and the school’s website at http://www.hphsnyc.org Assistant Principals Parent Pupil Path Workshops: November 29, 30, 2018 Progress Reports Mailing to Parents: October through June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly: Using the Parents Association Meeting platform, AP of Pupil Personnel will provide workshops to support parents with understanding of rigorous instruction and the New York State Learning Standards. Monthly: Our Parent Coordinator will continue to communicate and work to increase parent participation at meetings with the use of a Monthly Parent Newsletters, mailings and phone calls. Ongoing: The school’s private website will continue to be used as a platform for communicating with parents, as well as the Pupil Path website. Key Personnel: Assistant Principal – Pupil Personnel Services; Parent Coordinator; Assistant Principal Organization Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Shane Purse Associates will offer in-house professional development support for teachers with a focus on SWD and ELL students. G & R Inclusive Group LLC will offer in-house professional development support for teachers with a focus on ICT classrooms. Teachers will be encouraged to attend professional development opportunities off site. Per diem substitute teachers will be employed to cover classrooms. Purchase of GMRT exams to be administered on September 12-14, 2018 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, progress will be measured by the students' scores in the ELA January 2019 Regents exam. The Regents Analysis Tool Workbook Report will provide data on students scoring a 3 or higher on the text analysis portion of the ELA Regents exam. This information will be shared with the AP English for reflection and analysis during inquiry team meetings with teachers. 1. September 4, 2018: The Principal will provide the background to the work to be done and share the Instructional Focus with the faculty. 2. September 12-14, 2018: Administer assessment (GMRT exams) to measure students’ Lexile levels 3. September 28, 2018: Progress Report mailing to parents 4. November 2, 2018: Progress Report mailing to parents 5. November 29-30, 2018: Pupil Path Workshops for Parents 6. December 14, 2018: Progress Report mailing to parents 7. February 25, 2019:: Progress Report mailing to parents 8. April 8, 2019: Progress Report mailing to parents 9. May 22, 2019: Progress Report mailing to parents 10. Ongoing: Principal & Assistant Principals – Advance Observations of Classrooms 11. Weekly: Shane Purse in house support for teachers 12. Weekly: G & R Inclusive Group LLC in house support for teachers Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher created and administered thematic essays to all 11th grade students. Additionally, teachers will use January 2019 Regents exam as well as benchmarks throughout the year to gauge and monitor progress of students and student achievement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. We have an overall 90% plus attendance since 2010 as reflected in Progress Reports, Quality Reports, and ATS Data. Monthly two students with perfect attendance for the month are celebrated with movie tickets. In addition, we have an average of 85% plus in each Cohort earning 10 plus credits each year as reflected in The NYC Survey and Promotion for Next Grade Data. Each marking period students are celebrated with certificates of achievement for their report card averages (Merit 80-84, Honors 85-89, High Honors 90-100). 2. The NYC Survey for HPHS reflects the following statistics over the past years for Supportive Environment:  2014-2015 Supportive Environment – Positive Response 87% / Citywide % Positive Response 83%  2015-2016 Supportive Environment – Positive Response 75% / Citywide % Positive Response 69%  2016-2017 Supportive Environment - Positive Response 78% / Citywide % Positive Response 72% Even though we continue to surpass the citywide % positive response throughout the years, we will continue to take steps to improve in Social and Emotional Learning. We will continue to improve by creating a culture that encourages students to support one another at HPHS and we will continue to provide social and emotional growth for all of our students. 3. The school continues to maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students. We have an open-door policy welcoming parents and students. Teachers and guidance counselors continue to support the tutoring incentive called "Tutoring for Extra Credits" (students who attend at least five tutoring sessions in a marking period become eligible for extra credit). Student members express their opinion through the School Leadership Team and at monthly Student Council Meetings with the Principal. Grade-Level Teacher Teams continue to meet twice a month with guidance counselors to collaborate in dealing with academic and behavioral concerns. The Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) meets every last Monday of each month to discuss student needs. Guidance Counselors meet with the Principal Wednesdays to address student concerns and goals. Pupil Path, the school’s on-line system that stores grades, attendance, and information which can be easily accessed by parents and students to monitor progress, serves as an important means of communication. Services to encourage student social and emotional well-being continue, i.e., transfer high school fairs, Young Women's and Men's Leadership groups to discuss personal matters that put them at-risk for failure. The school continues to provide enriching after-school activities such as internship opportunities, extra-curricular activities, involvement in athletic teams, and clubs suggested by students. Guidance Counselors meet with students on an individual basis and through class articulation to program and encourage students to take more rigorous classes. Guidance Counselors encourage students to obtain an advanced regents diploma, regents diploma with honors and advanced regents diploma with honors. We have a “Best Buddies” type program with P 226. With the help from one of our guidance counselors, we have a group of Health Professions students working with the students from P 226. They are working hands on with the teachers and students in the classrooms. 7  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the NYC School Survey as well as the Student Perception Survey scores in social and emotional learning, specifically the areas of personal attention and support, next level guidance, and press toward academic achievement will improve by 5 percent. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Welcome Back Block Party Event. During the second week of September, we would like to have a Welcome Back Block Party to introduce our incoming 9th and 10th graders to our school as well as the possibility to buddy underclassmen with upperclassmen to act as peer mentors. Continue our Peer Mediation Program where students are able to talk about issues that might lead to a conflict. Students can go to the Peer Mediation Center without fear of disciplinary action taken against them. (Students have been trained in helping each other with strategies that eliminates student conflicts.) Let's Get Ready Program is an SAT preparation course which the school pays for to bring in outside SAT ELA and Math Tutors to work with the Cohort of approximately 75 students preparing them for the March administration of the SAT. Students are guaranteed to have two graded practice SATs with feedback to help them improve overall SAT scores. There will be progress monitoring every four weeks done by IEP Teachers and General Education Teachers for Students with Disabilities and ELL students. CUNY College Bridge 4 All Program where 3-4 students who have graduated from HPHS high school are hired as coaches to support high school seniors in all steps of college enrollment. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students September 20, 2018 COSA AP of Student Life Students Ongoing Peer Mediation Teacher 11th grade students T and Th CBO (CDI) December 2018 to March 2019 Supervised by an Assistant Principal Monthly Teachers April-August CBO (CDI) Students with Disabilities and ELL Students 12th Grade Seniors The CUNY LINCT Program supports current seniors who have scored below a 75 in the English Regents and below 70 in the Algebra Regents. These two groups of students who are not college ready are placed together in one English class and one math class using a curriculum designed by CUNY to prepare them for the January Regents and the Spring CUNY Placement Test to ensure no remediation courses are needed in college. 12th Grade Seniors Who are Not College Ready September-June 9 Supervised by AP Pupil Personnel Services Guidance Counselors 1 English Teacher 1 Math Teacher 1 Guidance Counselor  Supervised by AP Pupil Personnel Services CBO - CDI 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Key Personnel: Assistant Principal – Pupil Personnel Services; Parent Coordinator September 20, 2018 - Second Week of School - Parents will be invited to the Welcome Back Block Party Monthly Parents Association Meetings: September 12, 2018, October 10, 2018, November 7, 2018, December 12, 2018 (PTA Winter Banquet), January 9, 2019, February 13, 2019, March 13, 2019, April 10, 2019, May 8, 2019, June 12, 2019 (Principal’s Report, Year-End Wrap Up) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 One Percent will be used to purchase snacks and metrocards for parents. Title 1 Funding for Let's Get Ready Program, CUNY College Bridge 4 All, and CUNY LINCT Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Beginning in September: 1. Bi-monthly meetings of AP Supervision and guidance counselors to discuss student social and emotional needs. 2. Bi-monthly Instructional Rounds conducted by APs and Principal to observe teacher lessons and evaluate the level of intellectual and emotional engagement of students in the curriculum. In February 2019, we will use January Regents scores to assess student academic progress Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Evaluators’ Advance observations will help capture the progress of teachers addressing the social and emotional needs of our students including feedback from teachers and Assistant Principals using data from Advance, specifically 1a, 1e and 3c. We will use the January/June Regents to monitor student academic progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. HPHS has created several teacher team structures that allow professional collaboration. These teams promote the implementation of the New York State Learning Standards and the use of data to inform instruction. Our Inquiry Teams had been organized departmentally and had operated in somewhat isolation. We have created a School-wide Inquiry Team which is made up of teachers from all disciplines. The School-wide Inquiry Team has led several cycles of learning throughout the school year. The protocols that the team uses to analyze student work have evolved and are now a highly effective tool to analyze student work products. This team works closely with the smaller departmentalized Cycle of Learning/Inquiry Teams. The Cycles of Learning/Inquiry Teams in each department create New York State Learning Standards aligned assessment tasks and evaluate the effectiveness of those tasks on student outcomes. These teams also look at student work together in addition to analyzing student data from a myriad of sources including teacher made diagnostics, GMRT, 8th grade scores, attendance data and Regents exams. DOE Quality Review 2015-2016 rated the school well developed in the area of 4.2 (Teacher Teams and Leadership Development). The inquiry team meetings focus on implementing strategies to help students succeed in rigorous classes. Students achieve goals of college and career readiness as indicated by a graduation rate of 92%. Eighty-eight percent of students successfully completed approved college or career preparatory courses or assessments. One inquiry team created a menu of comprehension strategies for all teachers to use to reinforce instructional coherence across the school. The team analyzed strategies from different departments to determine which were the most appropriate to include in the menu. The team was observed discussing the inclusion of strategies such as using annotation, double-entry journals, anticipation guides, as well as using the Frayer model for morphology and vocabulary development. 2. Looking at our NYC Perception Survey results from the past few years, we have seen teachers questioning the level of PD provided to them. The Principal feels strongly that quality PD begins with addressing teacher needs to improve instruction for students. We have created several teacher Inquiry Teams with the goal in mind to look at student outcomes and improve the quality of instruction to bolster student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the survey scores in Quality of Professional Development will improve by 5 percent. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Unit Planning - In preparation for 2018-2019 school year, 25 teachers in ELA, SS, ENL, SE have been offered per session to plan backwards for the purpose to construct units that engage students in argumentative, higher level thinking then incorporates literacy skills such as document analysis and reading. The hopes is to increase teachers creating intellectually engaging tasks thereby improving the overall quality of daily instruction for students. Professional Development will be offered to teachers as they earn CTLE credits using CTLE providers from the NY Historical Society and Museum of Television & Radio. Workshops will be content-specific and some will be pedagogically focused. The School-wide Inquiry Team will meet bi-monthly with Assistant Principals Supervision and Principal to create strategies for teacher teams; create the model of the intervention plan; create teacher protocols for grade team meetings; share the work with all disciplines. Department Common Planning Meetings: Developing common assessment instruments; Post-assessment analysis of student work; Analysis of student data; Evaluation of written and taught curriculum; Monitoring student progress; Aligning New York State Learning Standards to written and taught curriculum Professional Development/Cycles of Learning Meetings: Focus on students in lowest third; Data analysis to evaluate instructional strategies and monitor student progress; Protocols to look at students’ work to inform instructional planning and implementation; Sharing best practices The School-wide Inquiry Team will compile evidence of the analysis of the student work and analyze data from teacher teams during Common Planning Time and Professional Development /Cycles of Learning meetings to gather evidence of student work and memorialize cycles of learning. Inform parents of the work being done in inquiry teams at monthly Parents Association Meetings and SLT meetings. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students June 27-28, 2018 Teachers Teachers Ongoing CTLE Credit Providers During PD Days and after school Teachers Bi-Monthly School-wide Inquiry Team Teachers Weekly Teachers Weekly Led by Teacher Leads with support from AP Supervision Lead by Teacher Leads with support from AP Supervision Students Weekly School-wide Inquiry Team Content-Area Teachers Parents Monthly Principal Assistant Principals 2 Teachers will look at student subgroup work to determine if strategies are effective for all learners. Students with Disabilities and ELLs Weekly School-wide Inquiry Team and Inquiry Team teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During Parents Association and SLT monthly meetings, the Principal will inform parents of the work being done in inquiry team meetings and the Principal’s Monthly Snack-N-Learns to better support their understanding of Collaborative Strategies at HPHS. Timeline: Monthly Key Personnel: Principal; Assistant Principal - Pupil Personnel Services; Assistant Principals - Supervision Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session will support after school work and the unit planning being done June 27-28, 2018 Title 1 for CTLE Professional Development Workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monitor progress towards providing quality professional development by working with UFT PD Committee to set professional development agendas for November 2018 and January 2019. Distribute and collect reflection/feedback surveys to gauge teacher satisfaction of professional development provided during November 2018 PD and January 2019 Chancellor's Day PD. In February 2019, use teacher surveys from November 2018 and January 2019 to measure teacher satisfaction and plan for June's professional development day. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. November and January PD Reflection/Feedback Surveys to assess quality of professional development Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Health professions High School has achieved success in the area of Effective School Leadership. On the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report the following are areas of celebration: Inclusive Leadership; Teacher Influence; Program Coherence; and Instructional Leadership. On the Framework for Great Schools 2017-2018 Report, an area where greater progress is needed is in the arena of Inclusive Leadership. This is also an indicator in Effective School Leadership where a well developed score was not achieved. 2. According to the 2017-2018 preliminary school quality snapshot, 64% of teachers say they trust the Principal. This is an area for growth and improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the teacher survey scores in Inclusive Leadership will improve from proficient to well developed. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Principal will host monthly Snack-N-Learns meetings in which the faculty will be able to join the Principal, sharing a light snack, to discuss information that they feel is vital to our school community. It will be an opportunity for the faculty to share their thoughts and concerns about how we can improve the quality of instruction in our school. The Principal will include teachers in decision making of professional development opportunities. Meet with the UFT/Professional Development Committee in anticipation of November and January's Professional Development Days to plan activities for teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Monthly Principal Teachers November Principal January How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In advance of monthly School Leadership Team meetings the principal will solicit input from the full school parent community and communicate to the SLT on behalf of parents' feedback. The Principal, Assistant Principal - PPS, Parent Coordinator, along with the PTA Executive Board, will work together to broaden and open the lines of communication with all HPHS families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School messenger, school website, emails, School Parent Newsletter with Principal's Monthly Message Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will look at school-wide policy changes brought about by the monthly Snack-N-Learns from September 2018 to January 2019. In February 2019, we will use Teacher Reflection/Feedback Surveys from November 2018 and January 2019 to assess teacher satisfaction of quality professional development Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. September to January's Snack-N-Learns Attendance Data will be compared to assess participation and progress. We will use Teacher Reflection/Feedback Surveys in November and January to assess teacher satisfaction of quality professional development Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Ongoing communication with parents is facilitated in a variety of ways. Administrators, teachers, counselors and other personnel are always available to work with parents during face-to-face meetings, over the phone or on e-mail. A parent coordinator produces a monthly newsletter and is available five days a week to assist parents. An active PTA continuously recruits parents and helps them to further their involvement with their children’s education. Parents also have an opportunity to serve on the SLT. When we need to apprise parents of activities and events at the school we rely on a variety of methods. In addition to having students “backpack” home letters and notices, we regularly make automated calls, send mass messages via Skedula and PupilPath, update the school's website and send items via regular and certified mail. Our Parent Coordinator is integral in providing a supported “Welcoming Environment” for all parents. The Parent Coordinator:  Regularly meets with the Assistant Principal of Pupil Personnel Services to establish goals for parent outreach.  Assists in holding welcoming events for parents of prospective students.  Greets and welcomes parents and students as they come into the school building each morning.  The HPHS Parent-Student Handbook is distributed to new parents and students at the annual Freshmen Orientation program in June. We have an ongoing partnership with CDI, Comprehensive Development Inc., a non-profit organization that provides career readiness and social services. The services include personalized college advisement for students and their families from college selection and application to navigating scholarships and financial aid. CDI organizes college fairs, campus visits and connect students with alumni through the school year. CDI is a tremendous value in providing student and family support services at The High School for Health Professions and Human Services. CDI staff members assigned to our school tirelessly work with our students and parents. They demonstrate great sensitivity to our student and family needs. They are perceptive, emphatic, and committed to every task they take on behalf of the school. 2. Percent of parent involvement in each specific area of need will be closely monitored at monthly SLT Meetings (50%), Parent Association Meetings (1%), Parent-Teacher Conferences (25%), CDI Sponsored Events (40%), Parents Retreat, Pupil Path online communication platform, PTA sponsored events, and school's website communication. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 7  By June 2019, the survey scores in Strong Family Community Ties, specifically the areas of Parent Involvement will improve by 6 percent. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? There is a dedicated secretary assigned to work with AP Special Education to ensure that a parent is physically present at every IEP meeting during the school year. Students with Disabilities As needed Assistant Principal Special Education We have increased our ENL Department by two teachers to a total of three ENL teachers. The three ENL teachers work with the ENL guidance counselor to ensure that parents of ENL students are kept informed of programming decisions and NYSESLAT scores. Continue use of Pupil Path and School Messenger as tools to improve communication with parents. Through the use of PupilPath send home Progress reports. Hold PupilPath training workshops for parents where parents will be invited to HPHS to work with staff to sign up and log into the system. Continue to use the School Messenger to contact parents for a variety of purposes that includes attendance, parent/teacher conferences, publicizing school events, reminders, and providing positive feedback such as congratulating students who have made an honors list. Grade Assemblies for 9, 10, 11 and 12 graders with AP Pupil Personnel Services, Guidance Counselors, COSA, and Parent Coordinator where students will receive information about graduation requirements, transcripts, elections of student officers will take place, and certificates for academic achievement will be distributed. Secretary to Special Education Department ENL Students As Needed Assistant Principal - English 3 ENL Teachers 1 Guidance Counselor Parents Monthly Assistant Principals Guidance Counselors Teachers All Students September 17, 2018: 12th Grade Assembly; September 24, 2018: 11th Grade Assembly; October 1, 2018: 10th Grade Assembly; Assistant Principal - Pupil Personnel Services Guidance Counselors COSA Parent Coordinator 9 PTA monthly workshops will be offered to families on various topics including academic requirements, teenage mental health concerns, domestic violence, and summer school jobs and opportunities for students. October 15, 2018: 9th Grade Assembly Parents Monthly Comprehensive Development Inc., community-based organization, will arrange family night events for students and parents on the topic of college application process and career opportunities. 9-12 Grade Students and Parents September 26, 2018; September 27, 2018 Assistant Principal - Pupil Personnel Services Community-Based Organization CDI – Community-Based Organization 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Partnership with Comprehensive Development Inc., community-based organization, will support students by providing college and career preparedness and one-on-one guidance for students and their families. Events will be held for students and their families in September, October, November, December, February and March. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title 1 One Percent Funding for Pupil Path with Parents' approval Title 1 Funding for Partnership with Comprehensive Development Inc., community-based organization, will continue to support student college and career preparedness events and one-on-one guidance for students and their families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will measure the number of parents attending PTA meetings by collecting attendance sheets. In February, we will present certificates of appreciation to all parents who attended a minimum of 4 out of 5 PTA meetings in the fall term. We will repeat this again in June. Parents Association Meetings: September 12, 2018; October 10, 2018; November 7, 2018; December 12, 2018; January 9, 2019; February 13, 2019; March 13, 2019; April 10, 2019; May 8, 2019; June 12, 2019: Principal’s Report, Year-End Wrap Up 0  Grade Assemblies for Students: September 12, 2018 - 12th Grade Assembly; September 24, 2018 - 11th Grade Assembly; October 1, 2018 - 10th Grade Assembly; October 15, 2018 - 9th Grade Assembly Comprehensive Development Inc. Events: September 26, 2018 - 9th, 10th, 11th Grades Parent Night; September 27, 2018 - Senior Parents Night; October 15-19, 2018 - College Applications Week; January 9, 2019 - Financial Aid Night; April 8-12, 2019 - College & Career Week Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will collect attendance sheets to keep track of parents attending PTA meetings and parent involvement events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Marking Period Grades – Fall & Spring Regents Examination Scores June 2018 and August 2018 Marking Period Grades – Fall & Spring Regents Examination Scores June 2018 and August 2018 Marking Period Grades – Fall & Spring Regents Examination Scores June 2018 and August 2018 Marking Period Grades – Fall & Spring Regents Examination Scores June 2018 and August 2018 Marking Period Grades – Fall & Spring Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Ramp-Up Classes Small Group During School Day Regents Prep Small Group Saturdays Writer’s Workshop 11 th Grade Students During School Day Teacher Tutoring Small Group Teacher Tutoring Small Group After school After school Regents Prep Small Group Saturdays Double Period Class Levels 1 & 2 Students During School Day Teacher Tutoring Small Group During School Day Makeup of Labs Small Group After school Regents Prep Small Group Saturdays Teacher Tutoring Small Group After school Regents Prep Small Group Saturdays Guidance Counselors School Psychologist Social Worker Individual Counseling; Referrals to Outside Agencies; Parent Telephone Conferences; Referrals to Alternative During School Day After school As needed 2  Regents Examination Scores June 2018 and August 2018 Placement; Referrals to Social Worker and School Psychologist; One-to-One and Group Counseling; Referrals to outside agencies for individual and family counseling; Letters sent home for failing two or more classes, promotion in doubt, and graduation in doubt; Mandated counseling provided by Social Worker and Guidance Counselor in group or one-to-one per student’s IEP 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 65 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Due to the different needs of our STH population, Title 1 funds will pay for basic/emergency supplies. Each student receives a custom pre-packed STH kit with the following contents: Book bag, 2 short-sleeve t-shirts, 2 long sleeve shirts, 2 sweatpants. Each item has an HPHS school logo on it. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Continue to utilize the Open Market system to develop a pool of HQT candidates to fill vacancies. ● Support untenured teachers with mentors and additional support from the respective Assistant Principals of Supervision. ● Offer differentiated opportunities for professional growth such as Advanced Placement seminars, CTE workshops, New York State Learning Standards workshops, Smartboard training, eBooks workshop, Museum seminars, etc. ● Provide leadership opportunities for HQT such as: joining the Inquiry Team; presenting best practices to staff at department or staff meetings; leading a teacher team; creating formative assessments for a subject area aligned to New York State Learning Standards; providing peer support with the New York State Learning Standards for other teachers; becoming a point person for Regents Item Analysis Reports, and Skedula. ● Form partnerships with traditional teacher education institutions and alternative licensure programs. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our school has made a concerted effort to support our teachers in acquiring the credits and exams necessary to be highly qualified. All teachers receive high quality professional development provided by NYCDOE and consultants from G&R Inclusive Coaching and Research and Shane Purse Associates. Through our intricate hiring process, our community has ensured that teachers’ beliefs are aligned with the vision, mission and culture of our school. New teachers are supported by collegial mentoring programs. Funding for self-identified Professional Development has been allocated to support pedagogical growth. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 6  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers work in departments with Assistant Principals Supervision during their inquiry sessions to create assessments and student rubrics aligned to the New York State Learning Standards to improve instruction. Principal and APs Supervision provide PD on how to look at student work to improve instruction. Teachers were provided with a copy of Looking at Student Work 2 nd edition, to create protocols for improving instruction. Teachers gave feedback to the UFT Chapter Committee who collaborated with the Principal on an SBO schedule for the school ensuring that there was time during the school day for teachers to work together to look at student work and improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 7 references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 958,621 0 12,366 0 10,310,422 Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-4b, 5B-4b, 5C-4b, 5D-4b, 5E-4b Title III Plan 5A-4b, 5C-4b, 5D-4b, 5E-4b, 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 8   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The school will involve the parents of children served in Title 1, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title 1, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into its school improvement plan. Parental Involvement and School Quality The High School for Health Professions and Human Services will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: 0  ● 1% of Title 1 funds will be used to plan for and present workshops on myriad topics: college application process, graduation requirements, the State and City Content and Performance Standards, gang awareness, SAT awareness, literacy training, CPR, computer technology, Pupil Path training ● Conduct annual school-wide conference on Title 1 ● Host monthly PTA meetings, provide refreshments for parents, provide translation services for parents, provide MetroCards for parents ● Parent year-end celebration Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Discretionary School Parental Involvement Policy Components The School Parental Involvement Policy may include additional paragraphs listing and describing other discretionary activities that the school, in consultation with its parents, chooses to undertake to build parents’ capacity for involvement in the school and school system to support their children’s academic achievement, such as the following discretionary activities listed under Section 1118(e) of the ESSA: ● Involving parents in the development of training for teachers, principals, and other educators to improve the effectiveness of that training; ● Paying reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school-related meetings and training sessions; ● Training parents to enhance the involvement of other parents; ● In order to maximize parental involvement and participation in their children’s education, arranging school meetings at a variety of times, or conducting in-home conferences between teachers or other educators, who work directly with participating children, with parents who are unable to attend those conferences at school; ● Adopting and implementing model approaches to improving parental involvement; ● Developing appropriate roles for community-based organizations and businesses in parental involvement activities; ● Providing other reasonable support for parental involvement activities under Section 1118 as parents may request; ● Working with our CBO, CDI, to provide ELL classes for the parents/guardians and family members of our students Adoption This school Parental Involvement Policy has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs, as evidenced by the PTA. 1  School-Parent Compact (SPC) High School for Health Professions and Human Services, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. The High School for Health Professions and Human Services will, with the assistance of its parents, educate its teachers, pupil services personnel, principal and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with, and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools by disseminating information via phone calls, emails, correspondence in a bi-lingual format, and Parent Association newsletter, as well as through Pupil Path progress reports. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum The school will put into operation program, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with Section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of Section 1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a school-parent compact consistent with Section 1118(d) of the ESSA. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships The High School for Health Professions and Human Services agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: The school will put into operation program, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with Section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of Section 1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a school-parent compact consistent with Section 1118(d) of the ESSA Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring: ● That parents plan an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; ● That parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; ● That parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in Section 1118 of the ESSA; 2  ● The school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality: The High School for Health Professions and Human Services will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under Section 1112 of the ESSA: - Parents will participate as members of our School Leadership Team. o Post the State standards for academic subjects I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff o Post the academic and discipline standards of The High School for Health Professions and Human Services o Post and advertise the requirements of Title I o Enable parents to monitor academic progress through Pupil Path o Establish and maintain a tutoring program in English and Mathematics I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents o Encourage parental involvement in school activities o Refer students to counseling resources o Have an annual meeting concerning Title I resources and activities o Educate teachers, administrators, and school staff about the Title I program o Set guidelines and clear expectations of good behavior and academic performance II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities o Ensure that their children have a quiet place and time to read, study, and complete homework o Discuss daily work assignments, progress reports, and grade reports with their children o Ensure that their children attend school on time every day o Promptly report any absences or tardiness o Communicate with the school through written and electronic messages, telephone, or conferences o Ensure that their children have the materials necessary to complete class work and home learning 3  o Take an active part in school activities, such as Parent-Teacher Conferences, Street Fair, School Trips and Title I Committee meetings o Keep their children healthy by ensuring that they get enough sleep, appropriate nutrition and medical care o Help their children to develop a good self-image by providing care, discipline, support, interest and concern o Provide the school with current and accurate home, work and emergency contact information o Foster in their children a positive attitude toward school and learning o Encourage my child to follow rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child o Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits o Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education o Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district o Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested o Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact III. Student Responsibilities o Attend school every day and arrive on time to all classes o Follow all school and classroom rules o Put their best effort forward at all times o Complete all homework and class work on time o Ask for assistance when it is needed o Use the tutoring program to increase academic achievement o Make informed decisions, set goals, and take action to meet requirements for graduation o Show respect for myself, other people and property o Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully o Always try my best to learn 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Based on the 2018 NYSESLAT, our school has 100 commanding, 69 expanding, 7 transitional, and 2 emerging scores for our ELL population, who are 9th-12th graders. Our school's instructional focus is to use culturally relevant education to increase the critical thinking and advance language abilities of all of our students. This means activating the cultural and linguistic resources of our students and providing appropriate scaffolds so that they are inspired to engage in challenging intellectual work that prepares them for college. Historically our ELL population and particularly the ones who are also SWD students, lag behind their mainstream counterparts in passing the NYS ELA Regents Examination. An analysis of their performances on the Regents, as well as their performances on NYSESLAT, indicates that these students lag in reading and writing skills. This was proven by the results of last year's GMRTs, which indicated that our ELL population is not reading in English as proficiently as their general education counterparts. On last year's NYSESLAT, although 69 students tested EX, they received lower scores on the reading and writing modalities than on the listening and speaking modalities thus preventing them from attaining CM. However, we also notice based on classroom observations that our ENL students are not participating in whole class discussions as much as their general education counterparts. To help students to develop the reading and writing skills needed to pass the ELA Regents Examination and graduate in a timely manner we will offer supplemental instruction during the week after school on Wednesdays. We will offer instruction to all ELLs but target in particular ELLs who are also SWDs. All three of the ENL teachers are familiar with and are implementing Kate Kinsella's methodologies for accelerating language development of ENL students. These programs offer tools, which are specially designed to facilitate better instruction of ENL students, i.e. sentence frames for enhancing more suitable and sophisticated syntax. Only supplemental materials like these will be purchased with Title III funding. By programming as many of the ENL students into the classes of the four trained regular educations teachers, ENL students will receive targetted instruction informed by these different methodologies in order to increase their achievement in core content areas and develop their abilities to comprehend and compose academic English. All of our ENL students will be programmed by no more than 2 contiguous grades for Gen Ed and no more than 3 contiguous grades for Sp. Ed. ensuring a certified ENL instructor teaches them for the correct number of minutes per week based on their proficiency levels. We are also working with the Foreign Language Department to enroll as many of our strongest users of academic Spanish into Advanced Spanish classes to exploit their home language skills to cognitively challenge them. We have displayed examples of our students' cultural heritage to celebrate their linguistic traditions and will acquire a collection of books in the major languages represented in our school to encourage our ELLs to read independently and continue to foster Advanced Literacy in their native languages. There are three certified ENL teachers who will offer instruction for our Title III program. We will purchase leveled texts in history and ELA that are especially relevant to the interest and background of our ELL students. These books will only be used for the Title III program. We will offer our ELLs an 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information enrichment class in ELA and History on Wednesdays from 4 p.m. to 5 p.m. after school for 32 weeks during the 2018-2019 school year as follows: Title III Enrichment Classes 2018 September 26 October 3, 10, 17, 24, 31 November 7, 14, 21, 28 December 5, 12, 19 2019 January 2, 9, 16 February 6, 13, 28 March 6, 13, 20, 27 April 3, 10, 17 May 1, 8, 15, 22, 29 June 5, 12 To target 88 non-commanding ELLs we will offer the program on Saturdays as well for seven Saturdays. Three certified ELL teachers will offer 2 hour sessions as follows: 2018-2019 November 17, 24 December 8, 15 January 5, 12, 19 Time 9-11 a.m To target 88 non-commanding ELLs we will offer the program on five Saturdays. The instrutional focus of the Saturday programs will be teaching ELLs to use strategies for writing effective responses to academic prompts. The supervisor designated for the Saturday and after school program will not be paid out of Title III funds. Three certified ELL teachers will offer 2 hour sessions as follows: 2019 May 4, 11, 18, 25 June 8, 15 Time 9-11 am Instruction will be in English, with teachers providing glossaries and other supplemental texts in the native languages of our ENL students. These languages are Spanish, Chinese, Bengali, Arabic and others.ESL Teachers will provide supplemental instruction to 9-12 grade ELLS grouped by NYSESLAT proficiency levels. Teachers will provide direct instruction using individual, small group and whole group teaching as well as the workshop model in reading and writing skills. These materials are supplemental and distinct from those used for regular instruction. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 7  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: All teachers working with ELLs require high quality professional development to maximize their impact on student achievement. Our ELLs are served in a free-standing and integrated ENL program. For much of the instruction, core content area teachers will be paired with a certified ENL teacher to serve students in an ICT model. To offer ongoing support and training, Assistant Principal for ENL, Doug Geogerian, will meet bi-monthly for one hour with teacher teams. Three certified ENL teachers and the 4 core teachers continue to receive professional development that enhances their abilities to meet the academic needs of our ENL students. PD will be designed to increase the effectiveness of instruction for ELLs and thereby enhance credit accumulation. Some of these discussions will concern unit planning, bolstering the impact of inquiry work, improving collaboration between ENL and general education co-teachers, and striving to implement advanced literacy practice in the classroom. The schedule/topics will be as follows for 2018-2019 November 29, 2018 -Getting started with ELLs-best practices and rti (2:30 p.m. - 3:55 p.m.) December 20, 2018 -Literacy and ELLs with Disabilities (2:30 p.m. - 3:55 p.m.) February 14, 2019 -ELLs and Vocabulary Development (2:30 p.m. - 3:55 p.m.) April 11, 2019 -ELLs and NYSESLAT (2:30 p.m. - 3:55 p.m.) May 23, 2019 -Assessing student data and planning for next year’s instruction (2:30 p.m. - 3:55 p.m.) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our ELL parents are already included in all parent activities at the school. However, to address the unique needs of ELL parents, we will hold additional meetings for all ELL parents once a month for one hour in the morning. ENL AP Geogerian will conduct each meeting. Discussion with parents will center around topics from the text New Generation Learning Standards K-12 Parent Guide. We will distribute to all ELL parents a copy of this booklet in English as well as in their home language, when available. We will purchase 85 copies in English, 55 in Spanish, 5 in Chinese, 10 in Bengali, and 5 in Arabic. Timetable (All Wednesdays, 8:10 a.m.) November 7 - Overview of New Generation Learning Standards December 12 - Graduation Requirements and Supports for ELLs January 9 - Celebrating the Cultural Diversity of our ELL Population February 6 - The Expectations of Advanced Literacy March 6 - College and Career Readiness for ELLs May 8 - Regents Examinations and ELL supports June 12 - Summer Options for ELLs Emphasis will be on making materials accessible to ELL parents. Translation Services will be available as will materials in translation. Focus will be on making topics accessible for parents of ELLs. 8 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parent Notification: Parents will be notified in a variety of ways: backpacked letter home, e-mails sent via Skedula, automated phone calls and notices on the school website. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 02 School Name High School for Health Professions Borough Manhattan School Number 420 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Robert Gentile Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dell'Olio; McElroy; Mousavi Teacher/Subject Area Charles Vaillant, Soc St/TESOL Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Chase Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Marisol Rosales Assistant Principal Doug Geogerian Coach type here School Counselor Phil Liebovitz Parent type here Parent Coordinator Natasha Delgado Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1848 Total number of ELLs 102 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.52% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For Reading: The ENL Department will use the Fountas and Pinnell system to track ENL students who are still not reading at the 9th grade level. For students reading at the 9th grade level and above, the ENL department will have students read passages determined to be at the 9th, 10th, 11th or 12th grade level. A teacher will ask the students questions to assess the students’ understanding of the reading’s meaning with a rubric. Once a student demonstrates comprehension of a grade level text higher than previously recorded, the ENL Department will inform the student’s core subject teachers that they need to offer the student readings commensurate with the new, higher capacity. The ENL department will conduct this reading assessment a minimum of four times a year with every student, but will venture to conduct it more frequently by keeping the reading assessment materials in all classrooms where ENL teachers co-teach. For Writing: The ENL department will keep a portfolio of each ENL student’s writing, capturing the student’s ability to write 1) 1  informational/analytical, 2) persuasive and 3)narrative texts. Students will select writing pieces (a minimum of three in each domain) from all core classes to include in the portfolio, which should demonstrate growth according to a rubric reflecting grade expectations. Students will write a reflection for self-assessment purposes at the end of the year, in which they explain how they have developed as a writer in these three domains, referring to the language of the rubrics as well as their own writing. For Speaking: The ENL Department will assess every ENL student’s ability to engage in intellectual discussion with their peers during Think, Pair, Shares and other such cooperative formats occurring in their core subject classes. Such cooperative structures are a critical means in the school for all students to gain ownership and construct knowledge and for their teachers to check their understanding. ENL teachers will use a rubric that measures how well students elaborate and clarify, provide or ask for supportive evidence, build on and/or challenge a partner’s ideas, paraphrase and synthesize (Zwiers and Crawford, 2011) For Listening: The ENL department will conduct brief interviews with ENL students by having them respond coherently to increasingly complex speeches. Teachers will track the level of difficulty of the speech students respond coherently to, aiming to challenge the student’s ability to listen at more advanced and sophisticated levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ENL department will meet weekly to ensure that student progress in reading, writing, speaking and listening is being tracked as described above. All teachers will record assessments results on an online document, which will be shared with common core subject teachers of ENL students. At this meeting, ENL teachers will generate strategies to support language development and record the appropriate ones for each student on the online spreadsheet. In addition, ENL teachers will meet weekly (as part of the SBO) with their core subject co-teachers for 39 minutes, when they will assess the strategies’ effectiveness in supporting each student’s language development and make adjustments accordingly. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The three main benchmarks that will be given are 1) the NYSESLAT, of course, 2) The GMRT (which is a reading test) and 3) two Mock ELA Regents examinations. The ENL department will note areas of strength and need based on the student’s performance on the four language areas measured on the NYSESLAT. Teachers will use this data to create goals and select strategies that harness student strength in one language area to address a need in another. The GMRT is administered in September and early May so that by the end of year teachers and students can see if progress was made in reading comprehension. This data will be considered with the last NYSESLAT score to see if students are developing as readers. Finally, a mock ELA examination will be administered in early November and again in December so that students and teachers know what is required to close the gap between where students are currently performing and where they must perform to achieve a college ready score or better. The exams will be scored just as they will be in January when they will take it during Regents week. For students who still need to pass the exam in June, a similar battery of mock exams will happen in the spring semester. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The same meetings and means of disseminating data between teachers for formative assessment (as described in response to question two) will be used for the summative assessments described in response to question three. In addition, the summative assessment results of ENL students (for the NYSESLAT, the GMRT and The Regents exam) will be reported to the cabinet of the school, which includes the Principal and all Assistant Principals of Supervision and Administration. We will work especially closely with the Assistant Principal of Data and Testing to present summative assessment results in an optimal way for teachers and administrators to analyze it. The ENL department will report to the cabinet all interventions that were used to support student learning successfully. It will also report all cases where interventions were unsuccessful and have already prepared alternatives for success in the future. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 2  When ENL students are at-risk of not meeting graduation requirements, the ENL department will convene an inquiry group comprised of the student’s core subject teachers, who will dedicate themselves to conducting an inquiry process for understanding why the student is falling behind and for implementing a cycle of supportive interventions. The inquiry team will examine assessment snapshots of the student’s current state of performance, looking at both summative and formative ones, and determine whether to administer an additional baseline for understanding why the student is struggling. With appropriate access, the inquiry team will examine the student’s prior educational records, interview teachers from past grades and hold an in depth interview with the parent(s) to gain a keener perspective on the student’s strength and struggles as an English language learner as well as on any impacting factors. As part of its professional obligations under the SBO, all teachers form inquiry teams that meet weekly. Inquiry teams for ENL students at risk would critically examine the suitability of interventions and strategies currently being employed by the student’s core-subject teachers and consult with them about “attuning” them to the student’s needs. The inquiry team would then visit the student’s core-subject classes to conduct low inference transcripts of the student using the strategies and receiving the intervention while trying to learn. The visiting observers will report and discuss the implications of the transcripts with the observed teacher to assess the on-going effectiveness of their approach and make adjustments accordingly. This cycle will be repeated at least twice in a marking period. Should two cycles not reverse the student’s learning trajectory, the AP Supervision for ENL will formally join the inquiry group, include other relevant specialists within the school community and reach out to learning experts who can optimize the school’s campaign for ensuring the student’s success. This campaign will observe the three-tiered system of RTI as outlined by the New York City Department of Education. The student’s teachers will refer to the RTI Literacy Resource section found on the DOE’s website to inform their work in empowering the student to meet grade-level expectations. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The primary question for evaluating the school’s ELL program is, “How well is the school empowering ENL students to meet or exceed grade level expectations and become college and career ready?” ENL students should make significant annual progress in each of the four language areas measured by the NYSESLAT. The ENL department will increase its proficiency in using the upgraded version of NYCDOE’s ELL Data Analysis Tool to track the multiple dimension of examining ENL progress until it masters it by no later than November of this school year. This analysis will inform the common planning work between ENL teachers and their core subject co-teachers during their scheduled time together. All students at the school take the ELA Common Core Regents Exam in January of their junior year. The ENL department will significantly focus on any ENL students who score below a 75 on the examination, responding to them as described in the response to question five, i.e. as though they are at-risk. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL department will provide a report within two weeks of receiving the results of the NYSESLAT (typically released in August) to the principal and his cabinet explaining how students not making significant progress in any of the four language areas will reach or exceed targets by the following year. A similar report will be provided for the GMRT administered as a post-test in May. Finally, the ENL department will provide a report within two weeks of receiving the results of the ELA Common Core Regents Exam to the principal and his cabinet explaining how students scoring below a 75 will earn a college ready score in the subsequent administration of the exam. The cabinet will offer feedback on how the ENL program is structured (as described in previous answers in this section) and make recommendations for adjusting it to more effectively serve its mission. The AP for Supervision of ENL will ensure the adjustments are implemented. Part IV: ELL Programming 3  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for ELLs in the Freestanding ENL program is delivered through integrated and standalone ENL classes. Students who have scored in the Entering level are provided with 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, students who scored at the Emerging level are provided with 90 minutes of standalone ENL, students who have scored at the Transitioning level areprovided with 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL, students who scored at the Expanding level receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and students who scored at the Commanding level have 90 minutes of integrated ENL. In standalone ENL classes students are grouped heterogeneously and with not more than two contiguous grades in one class. In the integrated ENL classes, students are grouped based on the class they are in and the ENL teacher collaborates with the classroomteacher(s) to plan ELA or History lessons that incorporate the needs of ELLs and former ELLs as well as otherstudents. In the integrated model, the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher co-teach the lesson planned, by differentiating instruction, working together to deliver the mini-lesson incorporating ENL strategies and then pulling a small group of ELLs and FELLs to work with the ENL teacher, or pulling the small group of ELLs initially and delivering the same mini-lesson to them as is given to the whole class. Commanding students receive 90 minutes in an integrated English or History class. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Administration ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in standalone and integrated classes. Administration has worked closely with the ENL and content area teachers to determine the structure of the program, how integrated ENL is provided as well as how ENL is provided based on different proficiency levels within the class. The decisions for how the program is structured and how instructional units of study are provided are based on the new CR Part 154.2 mandates. Similarly, administration works with the ENL teachers to ensure that all students are receiving the instructional minutes they require based on CR Part 154.2 mandates. In the ENL program, ELL students are grouped into the least number of classes possible for the grade they are in. This enables the ENL teachers to provide all students with the number of instructional minutes they need according to their proficiency levels. Grouping English Language Learners into as few classes as possible per grade in the Freestanding ENL program enables ENL teachers to provide 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL to any students at the Entering level, 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL to any students at the Emerging level, 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of either integrated ENL or standalone ENL to any students at the Transitioning level, 180 minutes of integrated ENL to students at the Expanding level, and 90 minutes of integrated ENL to students who have tested at the Commanding level. This grouping also facilitates the co-planning and co-teaching necessary amongst ENL teachers and classroom teachers to effectively service ELL students. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content for ELLs is delivered in English and History classes. The ability to make core content comprehensible to ELLs and providing equal access to all content to all students is of paramount importance to our school community. Over the 4  next two years, we plan on providing professional development hours and planning time to provide high quality differentiated instruction to all students, including English Language Learners. In ENL classes, core content is made comprehensible to ELLs through a variety of ENL strategies such as using native language supports, activating prior knowledge, repetition, front-loading vocabulary, modeling, scaffolding, using visuals and graphic organizers, student grouping, and by differentiating instruction, among others. Collaboration with content area teachers is also vital to ensuring all ELLs have access to the same content as their peers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Translation services are used upon enrollment of new students. Throughout the year, students are given the choice to complete oral and written assignments in their home language (L1) and/or in English. If students choose to complete work in their L1, bilingual teachers and staff translate and assess the work with the ENL teacher. In the event that no staff member speaks a student’s L1, translation services will be used. In such instances, feedback is provided in both English and the L1. Throughout the year, students may use real-time translating apps such as Google Translate to translate readings and written assignments in all core content classes. Students also have access to dual language dictionaries and glossaries for class work and formal assessments. The ENL library contains books in students’ home languages, and during independent reading a student can choose a book in English or in his or her L1. Whenever possible, newcomer and beginner ELLs are paired with an advanced student who speaks their L1, so to provide extra home language and English support. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 1. We identify all SIFE students to teachers who work with them, offer PD around their special needs and offer counselling, AIS, and other tutoring opportunities as needed. All teachers differentiate instruction for SIFE, using methods such as Q-Tel, Content Enhancement and reading and writing workshop. ENL teachers collaborate with Math and Science teachers to determine specific areas of need, and ENL teachers respond accordingly by providing translations or modifications of assignments, based on the student’s academic and/or language needs. Depending on the student’s need, the ENL teacher will also make additional recommendations for differentiated activities for SIFE and newcomer ELLs to the Science and Math departments. In Social Studies and ELA, SIFE are programmed into sections that are co-taught with an ENL teacher. Content differentiation and individualization in Social Studies, ENL and ELA vary, but may include use of translating apps and technologies, texts in the students’ L1, modified texts in English, graphic organizers for note-taking, extended time for tests and assignments, small group instruction and frequent interaction with teachers and peers (especially with students who share the ELL’s L1, whenever possible), frequent visual aids and enhanced vocabulary support through use of word walls, frayer model activities, and personal vocabulary notebooks. Extra counselling services are offered to meet the emotional needs of SIFE, and teachers make every effort to provide culturally responsive instruction to meet the unique needs of SIFE and newcomer ELLs. 2. Newcomers are programmed based on NYSESLAT or NYSITELL scores. They receive counselling, AIS and tutoring as needed. Teachers in all content area and ENL provide the same differentiation as for SIFE, above. Differentiation in Math and Science also include use of manipulatives, frequent visual aids and opportunities for newcomers to provide or clarify responses in their home language. For Social Studies, ENL and ELA, Newcomers are programmed into classes that are taught/co-taught by an ENL teacher. Content differentiation in Social Studies, ENL and ELA are the same as for SIFE (see above). Students may complete written or oral work in their home language, and teacher feedback will be provided in the student’s L1 and English. Newcomers are tested yearly using the NYSESLAT. They are tested regularly using periodical assessments and the GMRT. Junior ELLs are provided extra Saturday tutoring and programmed into English Writers Workshop to prepare them for the ELA Regents. 3. Developing ELLs Receiving service from 4-6 years are programmed based on their NYSESLAT scores. In addition to receiving content area differentiated instruction as above, the ENL teacher and content area teachers utilize NYSESLAT data and GMRT data to differentiate activities for these students. Scores are use to pinpoint strengths and weaknesses and tailor instruction to 5  them. Other data such as Regents scores, teacher data and periodic assessment data are utilized to aid in planning for instruction. They receive AIS and tutoring on an as needed basis. 4. Long-term ELLs receive tutoring, counseling and AIS as needed. NYSESLAT and teacher recorded data show that our long-term ELLs are generally advanced in spoken and social English, but need additional support in reading, speaking, writing, and listening to higher level academic English. With these needs in mind, long-term ELLs are mainstreamed in heterogeneous content classes, with ICT support from a special education teacher for students who require it. Long-term ELLs are programmed into ELA and/or Social Studies classes that are taught/co-taught by an ENL teacher, as data from test scores indicate that the humanities tend to be their greatest area of need. Math and Science teachers are provided with professional development for ELLs, and use Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English (SDAIE) strategies so meet the needs of long-term ELLs. This may include, but is not limited to: use of graphic organizers, use of manipulatives and visuals, frequent comprehension checks, partnering long-term ELLs with strong English speakers, opportunities to provide responses through multiple modalities, and provision of home language support through use of glossaries and translation technologies. Differentiation of instruction in Social Studies, ENL and ELA incorporate the same strategies, and also include increased efforts to develop literacy skills through Reciprocal Teaching (RT) strategies, heterogeneous group and project based learning, emphasis on academic vocabulary and word phrases, explicit explanation of idiomatic expressions, frequent writing opportunities with emphasis on the pre-writing period, and descriptive and individualized feedback with opportunities to revise work. 5. Former ELLs are mainstreamed in all classes and are identified as former ELLs to all staff so continued support may be offered in the content areas. They continue to receive integrated ENL support for a minimum of 90 minutes per week in their Social Studies and/or ELA classes. Teachers continue to use the same supports as aforementioned in Math, Science, ELA and Social Studies, but scaffolds are gradually removed as needed to foster students’ independence in reading, writing, listening, speaking and critical thinking. When planning for Regents testing, all former ELLs are identified and testing coordinator ensures that those eligible are tested in a separate location and given extended time as per state mandates. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are provided with the same grade-level materials as their peers, although the materials may be modified at times to be more comprehensible for the student. Instructional strategies used to enhance the comprehension of ELL-SWDs are activating prior knowledge, modeling, repetition, using visuals whenever possible, writing out directions, chunking text, frontloading vocabulary, using graphic organizers, and pulling small groups of students for direct instruction. Teachers use a variety of Common Core approved materials in all content and elective classes. Technology is also used to support ELLs, such as Smartboards, laptops and iPads. In addition to the regular curriculum for ELA, our school currently uses one other program which was written specifically for ELLs by Dr. Kate Kinsella-- English 3D. This program was designed to accelerate the English language development for English Language Learners. We plan to order a second program designed to accelerate vocabulary learning for ELLs within the next two years—Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, also by Dr. Kate Kinsella. The High School for Health Professions and Human Services is planning on introducing the R.E.A.D. program (Reading Educational Assistance Dogs) to ELL/SWDs. The mission of R.E.A.D. is to improve the literacy skills of children through the assistance of registered therapy teams as literacy mentors. The R.E.A.D. program improves children's reading and communication skills by employing a powerful method: reading to an animal. R.E.A.D. companions are registered therapy animals who volunteer with their owner/handlers as a team, going to schools, libraries and many other settings as reading companions for children. R.E.A.D. is the first and foremost program that utilizes therapy animals to help kids improve their reading and communication skills and also teaches them to love books and reading. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school enables ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment by modifying the content of the curriculum when necessary, aligning language goals to IEP goals whenever possible, working collaboratively with administration, school social workers, psychologists, general and special education teachers to determine student progress, and being flexible in changing goals to reflect the student's current needs. In addition, the ENL teachers are members of the SIT/RTI team and are involved with advocating for the needs of ELL-SWDs to ensure that all teachers working with them are aware of their second language needs and how to differentiate these needs 6  from their learning disability. It is also a priority goal of this team to ensure that ELLs are properly identified as SWDs and are not put in more restrictive settings than necessary due to their second language acquisition needs. This is done through different academic interventions because ELLs may have different learning styles and may access the curriculum through different means. All students are placed in the least restrictive environment as per federal, state and local mandates. Flexibility in scheduling allows us to offer weekly tutoring, ICT classes, and SETTS. Teachers are given ongoing training in modifying curricula and materials to make them accessible. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In standalone classes as well as small group stations, ENL teachers include using native language vocabulary to assist in the students’ comprehension of the specialized English content vocabulary. This is done so that the students’ L1 vocabulary skills transfer to their L2. This is done in both English and History. The ELLs also receive specialized academic vocabulary instruction prior to moving on to the next unit in core content classes. The vocabulary is frontloaded and glossaries are given to assist students in better being able to grasp their content subjects as the school year progresses. For intervention in content areas, vocabulary is also frontloaded from the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, a special program for ELLs. The ENL teachers also work with content area teachers to give language tools (vocabulary lists, modified texts, modified assignments) to help students achieve the standards in all content subjects. During ENL tutoring, which occurs two days a week, the students work with the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit to focus on specialized academic vocabulary for each core subject individually - math, history, science, and ELA/writing. This toolkit has provided a wonderful way for older ELLs to “own” content vocabulary that is shared across all subject areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? HPHS is in the process of integrating two new programs developed with ELLs into the curriculum: Dr. Kate Kinsella’s Academic Vocabulary Toolkit and English 3D, a vocabulary program and a Reading/Writing program respectively. Both of these programs were created for English Language Learners, particularly the middle and long-term ELLs, which make up more than 90% of our ELL population. Furthermore, HPHS is working to expand co-teaching models and strengthen the collaboration between classroom teachers and the ENL teachers who conduct stand-alone and integrated instruction. This collaboration strengthens instruction and allows students to get additional support in the content areas. A PD cycle will be offered to general education teachers with ELLs in their classrooms to learn more about ELL strategies in order to enable them to better support ELLs when an ENL teacher is not present. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs can and do participate in all school programs without exception. We are a comprehensive high school that offers two specialized programs as part of the curricula: Science Research and Medical Assisting. ELLs and Former ELLs are represented in both programs. They are apprised of the programs via the high school selection process before they come to us; articulation visits from our APG when they are in 8th grade; through school assemblies, letters home, guidance sessions and classroom visits by science department AP Donna Lopiccolo. We offer an after school program that includes clubs (eg. Yearbook, Newspaper, Chess) and athletics. ELLs and former ELLs are recruited for all via announcements, postings on bulletin boards, and backpacked letters home. We use Title III services to provide supplemental tutoring for ELLS. The goal is to prepare students for NYSESLAT and Regents. The rationale for using tutoring is because it allows the teacher to offer on-on-one differentiated preparation for exams. This is conducted by a licensed ENL teacher and includes approximately 90 hours per year. In addition, we use Title III funding to conduct meetings for parents of ELLs. These meetings focus on topics of interest to parents of high schoolers and include college planning and preparing for Regents and NYSESLAT. They are conducted by the ESL teacher Shadi Mousavi and Gina Mazzarella and members of the guidance staff. The goal is to keep parents informed of the many opportunities for their children, to make them feel a part of the HPHS family and to 7  communicate important information. The rationale for having special parent meetings is that we can better tailor the content to the needs of ELL parents. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs have access to the same materials as mainstream students, including technology. There are three media/computer labs on the premises, a library equipped with Macs, classrooms equipped with Smart boards, laptops and iPad carts. For all content areas, dictionaries, glossaries and translated materials are available. ENL curriculum materials include various materials aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and other New York State standards such as The Academic Vocabulary Toolkit and English 3D. All resources are leveled by grade range and language proficiency. Students are assessed to correctly match the materials by proficiency or grade to the appropriate levels. We have started to use some of the materials recommended by the Office of Curriculum and Instruction such as Teaching to Transform: An Instructional Practice Guide to Support Struggling Readers and Writers in Grades 6-12, Introducing Literature Circle Titles Through Book Talks, Educating Powerful Writers: Integrated High School Scope & Sequence for Writing. Technology is used in the classroom to enhance instruction whenever possible. There are laptops carts available to all English Language Learners, and most classrooms have Smart boards. Some teachers also have access to document readers and iPads, which are often used for small group instruction with ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Dictionaries and glossaries in the native language are made available in the ENL and content areas as needed. We have glossaries for physics, chemistry, biology, global studies and US history. Dictionaries are available in Bengali, Urdu, French, Spanish, etc. (We do not have a TBE or DL program) 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All materials and services are selected by teachers, guidance counselors and administrators with deep consideration to indivdual students and groups of students age and grade levels. We select and use curricular materials with a full understanding of the state and local standards and CCLS for each grade level. At PD and department conferences we reiterate the need for making sure that materials are developmentally and academically appropriate and scaffolded to meet students at their level and aid them in reaching higher achievement levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs have access to the same materials as mainstream students, including technology. There are three media/computer lags on the premises, a library equipped with Macs, classrooms equipped with smartboards and ipad and laptop carts; all are at the disposal of ELLS. For all content areas, dictionaries, glossaries and translated material when available can be provided. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All new students attend a June orientation before beginning in September. We currently offer no pre-year programs to any students, ELL or mainstream. However, if the budget permits, we will offer a summer bridge program for ELLs and mainstream students during the summer. Activities will include assessments, guidance sessions and introductions to HS English and Math along with programs to allow students to get to know each other socially. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish 1-6 and Advanced Placement Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 8  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers are encouraged to attend professional developments geared toward ELL compliance, ELL strategies in the classroom, ENL across content areas, and various other ELL topics. Any ENL teacher that attends a workshop will turnkey to the department. For the 2018-2019 school year, we are working toward full staff participation in professional development opportunities to strengthen instruction for the ELL population. We hope to have these workshops facilitated by invited staff developers from the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit, the Manhattan Field Support Center (ELL Committee), English 3D program, and QTEL. The ENL teachers will also provide training for content area teachers during common planning times which are held on a weekly basis. This will allow us to meet the requirements of 15% PD hours of training. The topics of these trainings will involve Collaboration and Co-Teaching, Implications of the NYSESLAT, Applying the Common Core Standards to ELLs, Long Term ELLs, and ENL Strategies for ELLs.In order to help teachers of ELLs support their students as they engage in the Common Core professional development, the ENL teachers will attend a professional development meeting this fall regarding the New Language Progressions which they will then turn key to the entire school during professional development time. The standards and ways to assess ELLs’ progress will be shared with all school staff so they can effectively support ELLs as they engage in rigorous Common Core schoolwork. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We meet the required hours of ELL training for all staff via PD conducted at department and faculty conferences and during chancellor's conference days. Sessions include best practices in literacy and mathematics for ELLS, teaching academic language, aligning CCLS with the curricula and making it accessible for ELLS. Records are kept of all PD within departments and centrally by the APO. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We plan to hold meetings about the NYSESLAT both at the start of the school year in October and again in March before the exam is given so that parents fully understand their children’s academic language goals and how all stakeholders will support their realization of them. Additionally, these meetings allow parents to gain a better idea of the support their student is getting through the ENL program at HPHS. Along with the two ENL department meetings, parent-teacher conferences are held twice a year, in November and again in March. Parents of all ELLs are invited to visit with their child’s ENL teacher at these meetings to review progress their student have made with their English acquisition, as well as areas in which they are still seeking to improve. Parents are invited via letters from the school generated in their preferred language of correspondence and are 9  conducted by the ENL department. For parents who cannot attend, the information from the meeting is sent home (in their preferred language). 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are an integral part of our school and the ENL program. HPHS has an active Parent Association that provides a variety of workshops and events for parents. The parent coordinator at the school works closely with the Parent Association to mediate the needs of the school and the needs of the parent, and helps to create a healthy partnership between the school and the home. As someone who speaks both Spanish and English, she acts as a translator at many parent meetings. When a language other than Spanish is spoken, the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is utilized. These events are intended to help parents be more involved with their students’ academic lives and be present in the classroom environment. As a community, the parents are welcomed participants on field trips, school shows, and other activities. At meetings with parents, strategies are shared for exercises they can do at home with their child to help them improve their language skills, which includes native language instruction from the parent when possible. In March, the ENL department will hold a workshop for parents to help them understand the implications of the NYSESLAT and how they can help their children study and prepare at home. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Robert Gentile, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Health Professions School DBN: 02M420 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Robert A. Gentile Title Principal Doug Geogerian Assistant Principal Natasha Delgado Parent Coordinator Dell'Olio; McElroy; Mousavi ENL/Bilingual Teacher n/a Parent Charles Vaillant Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Chase Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Phil Liebovitz School Counselor Marisol Rosales Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M420 School Name: Health Professions & Human Services Superintendent: V. Orlen The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Phil Natasha Liebovitz Delgado AP Parent Coordinator NO NO YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We determine the primary language spoken by each parent through a variety of methods. Any student who is new to the system completes a Home Language Identification Survey indicating which language they prefer. We also look at information ATS provides. We ask that students indicate a language preference on their emergency blue cards, which are collected from every student every year. In addition, information is also gathered from our parent coordinator and guidance counselors at orientation sessions, parent/teacher conferences, guidance meetings, and other interactions with students and parents. We will conduct a language survey using the school's website with the languages that parents speak, by class and grade. 3  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral AK AKAN AL ALBANIAN AO AMOY AR ARABIC BG BENGALI BM BAMBARA BS BURMESE CH CHINESE ANY CN CANTONESE DA DARI/FARSI/PERSIAN EO ESTONIAN FR FRENCH FU FULANI GK GREEK HA HAITIAN CREOLE HU HAUSA IN INDONESIAN KO KOREAN MB MANDINKA MN MANDARIN NE NEPALI NO ENGLISH 1 5 0 42 166 1 1 172 0 2 2 7 3 1 3 1 5 5 1 0 18 1482 NS STUDENT DOES NOT SPEAK 1 ON ONEIDA PA PASHTO PI PILIPINO PJ PUNJABI PL POLISH PO PORTUGUESE RU RUSSIAN SC SENUFO SF SINHALESE SO SLOVAK SP SPANISH SQ SONINKE 0 1 8 4 35 2 6 3 1 1 951 2 0.03 0.17 0 1.41 5.58 0.03 0.03 5.78 0 0.07 0.07 0.24 0.1 0.03 0.1 0.03 0.17 0.17 0.03 0 0.6 49.78 0.03 0 0.03 0.27 0.13 1.18 0.07 0.2 0.1 0.03 0.03 31.94 0.07 1 5 2 42 169 2 1 102 14 2 2 9 5 1 3 1 5 5 1 55 20 1468 0 1 1 8 4 35 3 9 3 1 0 951 2 0.03 0.17 0.07 1.41 5.68 0.07 0.03 3.43 0.47 0.07 0.07 0.3 0.17 0.03 0.1 0.03 0.17 0.17 0.03 1.85 0.67 49.31 0 0.03 0.03 0.27 0.13 1.18 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.03 0 31.94 0.07 4  SX AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE TH THAI TI TIBETAN TU TURKISH TW TWI UD URDU UR UKRAINIAN VN VIETNAMESE WO WOLOF 2 1 9 0 3 21 4 1 3 0.07 0.03 0.3 0 0.1 0.71 0.13 0.03 0.1 2 1 9 1 3 21 4 0 3 0.07 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.1 0.71 0.13 0 0.1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families PTA Meetings Information Monthly School-wide Mailings and Letters Backpacked Home Ongoing; as needed How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School Secretary, Ms. Gutierrez, who is fluent in Spanish will translate all messages into Spanish for our students and parents. Both English and Spanish information will be posted in our school's website. School's website has a feature where viewers may have all information translated into the language of their choice. School Secretary, Ms. Gutierrez, who is fluent in Spanish will translate all messages into Spanish for our students and parents. Both English and Spanish information will be posted in our 5  School Messages Ongoing; as needed Promotional Requirements Ongoing; as needed Parent Newsletters Monthly Parent-Student Handbook 9th Grade Orientation Letters informing parents of major changes in school policy, etc.) Ongoing; as needed school's website. School's website has a feature where viewers may have all information translated into the language of their choice. Our communication system, Skedula, gives parents the option to pick their language preference for both written and oral communication. School messages are sent out in both English and Spanish using translation services and Google translation services. Translations provided by DOE - translated cards are sent to us Parent Coordinator and School Secretary, Ms. Gutierrez, will provide Spanish translation upon request from parents. Parent Coordinator and School Secretary, Ms. Gutierrez, will provide Spanish translation upon request from parents. Our communication system, Skedula, gives parents the option to pick their language preference for both written and oral communication. School messages are sent out in both English and Spanish using translation services and Google translation services. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide PTA Meetings 9/12/18, 10/10/10, 11/7/18, 12/12/18, 1/9/19, 2/13/19, 3/13/19, 4/10/19, 5/8/19, 6/12/19 interpretation service(s)? Dates are posted on school website and may be translated into home language. Currently, interpretation is provided in Spanish. This service is provided at every PTA meeting and formal face-to-face meetings by staff. 6  Parent-Teacher Conferences 11/29/2018, 11/30/2018 3/7/2019, 3/8/2019 Face to Face Meetings and IEP Meetings Ongoing Telephone communication of major importance is done via our automated phone system and translated into Spanish each time Telephone communication of major importance is done via our automated phone system and translated into Spanish each time Guidance Counselors and Parent Coordinator who are fluent in Spanish provide translation and interpretation services which involve confidential matters. When not available, we access translation service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Emergency communication to parents via phonemaster in home and posting on school website, which can be translated by parent in a home language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Principal shares all Chancellor's Regulations with all staff in the summer using the email system and a zip file to ensure all staff are aware of Chancellor's Regulations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Upon entrance to our school, parents of students whose home language indicated is other than English shall receive notification of the language assistance services and their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in their respective home language. A notice, in the covered languages, will be posted in the main lobby directing parents to the parent coordinator’s office where information regarding language assistance services will be available. All DOE communications will be made available in the student’s home language. Whenever possible, all PTA meeting notices, 7  communications mailed home and sent home with students will be made available in the three languages most represented in our school – English, Spanish and Bengali. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school gathers feedback during monthly PTA meetings. 8 
