 03M421 School Name: WEST PREP ACADEMY Principal: CARLAND WASHINGTON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: West Prep Academy 310300010421 6, 7, 8, SE 150 W 105 th St NY, NY 10025 212-280-8502 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 03M421 212-280-8509 Fax: Carland Washington School Contact Person: Principal: Email Address: Carland Washington Nicole Feliciano UFT Chapter Leader: Cwashington8@schools.nyc.gov Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Shamel Flowers Shamel Flowers Edwin Franco NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 03 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ilene Altschul Superintendent: 154 W 93 rd St Rm 122, NY, NY 10025 ialtsch@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-678-5857 Phone Number: Manhattan FSC: 212-222-7816 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Yuet Chu Executive Director:   333 Seventh Ave, 8th floor NY, NY, 10001 Executive Director’s Office Address: YChu@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 646.470.0721 Phone Number: 917.339.1765 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Carland Washington Nicole Feliciano ShamelFlowers N/A Edwin Franco N/A N/A Enoch Mariscal Grace Kim YasminCooper Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tanairis Noriega Kimberly Smith Priscilla Martinez N/A N/A NA NA NA Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The school’s mission is to serve as a bridge to high school by engaging students with authentic learning experiences and to ensure their future success in high school, college, and the professional world.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. West Prep Academy serves approximately 200 students in grades 6 through 8. A magnet school founded under the theme of “Youth Voice Through Youth Media,” West Prep Academy promotes 21st-century skills and student voice through the integration of technology in its classrooms and elective offerings that include media and film. West Prep Academy is a member of the NYC DOE’s Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI), a select group of district middle schools who are at the forefront of literacy reform efforts. These schools implement and evaluate the effects of research-based methodology aimed at solving some of the city’s most persistent achievement problems. West Prep Academy also partners with WestEd, an after-school program that supports the school’s media focus, and Wellness in the Schools, which brings structured physical activity and healthy food options. Additionally, the school’s adoption of Yale University’s RULER program has helped it to create a defined program to address the social-emotional development of its students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Guiding its students to reach grade-level standards remains West Prep Academy’s biggest challenge. The overwhelming majority (roughly 85%) of West Prep Academy’s students enter the school below grade level in math and/or English, so the scale of the remediation has kept the challenge a persistent one . These academic challenges are also seen in the school’s special education population (currently 34% of the student body) and our ENL population (currently 10% of the student body). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. West Prep Academy works effectively to track it students’ academic needs and progress. Its administration and teacher teams use data to build an instructional program that addresses remedial and grade-level goals. Partnership, program, and staffing decisions accurately reflect these priorities, and the school has had success helping its students make academic improvements. These successes, along with the school’s strong culture and record of teacher leadership, are reflected in the results of its 2014-2015 School Quality Review. Considering these results within the Framework for Great Schools, West Prep Academy has had demonstrable success with promoting strong family-community ties , a supportive environment , and collaborative teachers . The academic needs of both its general and special education students mean that Rigorous Instruction will be West Prep Academy’s primary focus for the 2018-2019 school year (and, accordingly, the rigorous instruction segment of the Framework for Great Schools). To meet the instructional needs of it students, West Prep Academy must focus on engaging students in learning tasks that are appropriately challenging and leveled. Furthermore, the school must expand its data work so that student understanding of the standards is tracked, and it must allow the data to directly inform its curriculum and the re-teaching of specific standards. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 03M421 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 203 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 12 12 7 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 14 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 80.3% % Reduced Lunch 6.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 36.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.41 11% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 47.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 37 37 90.1% 4.4% 34.5% 60.6% 0.5% 0.5% 2 56% 4.9 11.3% 36% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has worked to implement, monitor, evaluate, and adapt unit and lesson plans reflecting the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and the instructional shifts. Performance data is used to inform the planning and delivery of rigorous and coherent curricula that provide necessary supports and extensions for all groups of students across all content areas and grades. Teachers meet in grade level and department teams to plan lessons and use these venues to look at student work to inform future planning. As a magnet school focusing on media and technology, our school employs a Magnet Instructional Specialist that helps to incorporate technology and outside partners in all aspects of student learning. As a result, all students are becoming more engaged in robust lessons that maximize teacher instructional practices and learner outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers through ongoing professional development will use research-based practices to design unit plans that will emphasize the sequencing of learning targets to best prepare students for summative assessments and ensure these assessments resulting in a 5% increase 1E - Designing coherent instruction. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). MSQI Partnership ● Research-based instructional program with professional development from assigned Literacy Coaches ● Teachers receive ongoing PD from literacy coach and English as a New Language Teacher on curriculum implementation ● Parents attend curriculum night to learn about curriculum and supports for students at home . Summer Teacher Institute (Week long professional development for all pedagogues) and After school co-planning ● Research-based instructional program with professional development from Thinking maps coordinator ● Monday PD time devoted to implementation with fidelity, along with strategic supports for English as a New Language students and Students with Disabilities. ● Parents attend curriculum night to learn about curriculum and supports for students at home 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Admin Teachers Students July 2018-June 2019 Admin Teachers Students Aug 2018-June 2019 Administration MSQI Coordinator Teachers Students ENLs SWDs How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator Family Curriculum Nights Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 3  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Hire English Language Arts teacher Hire Social Studies teacher Hire Math teacher Per session funds for summer and after school PD Word Generation material costs Wilson/Just Words Reading material costs Per diem for PD coverage Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will have created five common core units and participated in peer observations resulting in a 4% increase in Danielson 1E as measured in Advance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Internal school unit plan documents Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school provides a physically safe learning environment. Practices designed to respond to students facing social-emotional developmental health challenges are integrated into all aspects of school culture. There are practices and distinct programs such as RULER and MSFC supported initiatives in place. Last year, the school introduced a comprehensive, data-driven system that includes ongoing PD opportunities for all stakeholders that promote wellness and proactively address the needs of all students. This year, we will focus on engaging more parents in understanding the school's social and emotional learning and academic initiatives to help improve attendance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through a structured advisory program and the promotion of positive behavior, West Prep will improve from an overall 90% attendance rate to 93%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Modify current SEL program through RULER and StrengthsFinder Students June 2018-June 2019 Admin ● Introduce RULER, a Yale University based program designed to build emotional intelligence in students to new admits Parents ● Program designed to build vocabulary for ENLs and SWDs ● Parents will attend an implementation workshop in October and receive ongoing support and info during Parents Association meetings ● Parents and students have an open line of communication with administration and guidance counselors to address concerns and request support Daily attendance monitoring and incentives for good behavior and attendance ● Hire a community assistant to monitor and update attendance daily ● Incentive activities designed to enrich learning opportunities for ENLs and SWDs (Broadway shows, Out-of-town learning experiences) ● Parent rewards for students with perfect attendance and a parent banquet awarding parents for their efforts of getting students to school on time with good behavior Teachers Admin Students Parents Admin Teachers Guidance Counselor Director of Student Support Teachers July 2018-June 2019 Admin Guidance Counselor Director of Student Support Teachers Parents ● Parents and students contribute to ideas for incentives Continue developing the Marching Band program as an incentive to come to school and to develop a cultural arts program that prepares students for high school, college and career readiness. Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Magnet Specialist Admin 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator Monthly engagement activities Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for Community assistant to monitor attendance Ruler training and implementation costs After school programming cost for athletics and academic support Costs for attendance and academic incentives Continue the marching band program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, ATS reports will reflect a 92% average daily attendance rate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our staff collaborates and supports one another in creating a learning environment designed to address student needs. The use of practices that address actionable feedback to students, the use of strategies that address individual student learning needs, multiple opportunities for students to access complex content and higher-order questioning is monitored through frequent formal and informal observations by administration and peers. As a result, the staff has progressed in its efforts to align strategic practices and decisions to the CCLS and instructional shifts, student engagement and achievement in rigorous learning opportunities. All classrooms will provide students the opportunity to read and respond to grade-level texts, with a focus on academic vocabulary acquisition and evidence-based writing. Teachers will also collaborate on the implementation of a new strategic math intervention program supported by i-Ready. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have collaborated with MSQI to incorporate a variety of strategies for improving students academic vocabulary acquisition and evidence-based writing; resulting in a 3-5 level increase in reading from the Fall to Spring DRP assessment. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Summer Teacher Institute (Week long professional development for all pedagogues) and After school co-planning Admin July 2018- June 2019 Admin ● Teacher leaders receive training to turnkey professional development Teachers Students Teachers CBOs ● Monday PD time devoted to implementation PD ideas with fidelity. ENL teacher facilitates PD on best strategies for working with ENLs. Special Education Coordinator facilitates PD on best strategies for working with SWDs. ● Parents attend curriculum night to learn about curriculum and supports for students at home ● Active research promotes shared interest in topics considered for professional development Development of Teacher Leadership Admin July 2018-June 2019 Admin ● Identify and support Mentor and Master Teachers, in addition to developing staff to serve as cooperating teachers with the New York City Teaching Collaborative Fellowship Master and Mentor Teachers ● Teachers receive ongoing support from NYCTCF and TIF to support ENLs and SWDs PD Students Teachers ● Parents attend curriculum night to learn about curriculum and supports for students at home Teachers BSFC Support TIF Coaches ● Teachers have choice in participating in aforementioned activities MSQI/CPET Partnership Admin July 2018-June 2019 Admin Research-based instructional program with professional development from assigned Literacy Coaches MSQI Coordinator MSQI Coordinator  ● Teachers receive ongoing PD from literacy coach and Teachers ENL teacher on curriculum implementation Students Teachers Students 9  ● Parents attend curriculum night to learn about  curriculum and supports for students at home . - Using data from DRP Assessment, create strategic reading groups for Newsela and STARi and Wilson groups  Ongoing math coach support from CPET (Columbia University) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator Academic Parent Team Teacher meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Summer Teacher Institute (per session) Thinking Maps training costs Per Diem for substitute teachers for PD Word Generation materials costs Wilson Reading System materials costs Costs for implementing STARi and Newsela i-Ready costs and PD CPET coaching costs and fees New Pearson math curriculum Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  By February 2019, all students will show 2-4 levels of improvement in reading based on two administrations of the DRP. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from DRP Assessments Data from i-Ready Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders are collaborating with staff to create systems and protocols that are functional and aligned to the school’s vision and SMART goals related to academic and social-emotional developmental health for all students. We have put in place evidence-based systems, supported by a wide range of instructional coaches and professional development, to promote school improvement, such as the Advance observation program. The administration monitors and support teacher performance through a variety of strategies. This school year, all teachers will receive a minimum of four observations during four observations cycles. Teachers will receive formative and evaluative feedback from administration, coaches, and district-level specialists. The school has partnered with the New York Teaching Collaborative Fellows to create a pipeline for student teachers to work at West Prep Academy as vacancies become available. The school is moving forward in approaches that align to the mission, goals and the improvement of individual and school-wide practices to support the needs of all stakeholders . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Through differentiated supports provided by administration and teacher leaders, West Prep Academy teachers will have participated in three data cycles -- using data gathered from formative and summative assessments -- to monitor student progress in content standards and to inform classroom practice that is differentiated resulting in 5% increase in 3D - Using Assessment in Instruction. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue to support teacher development through Advance (Danielson) ● Teachers will receive professional learning that supports the specific methodology behind the framework. The school’s professional learning focus around Danielson will be concentrated on components 1e, 3c, and 3d, areas that have been identified as a high-leverage for student achievement Admin Students Teachers August 2018-April 2019 Admin Teachers Talent Coaches MFSC Support ● Parents attend Scholar Led Conferences which supports engaging students in learning ● Active research promotes shared interest in topics considered for professional development Targeted Professional Development for teachers ● Expeditionary Learning curriculum PD for Literacy teachers , Urban Advantage for Science, and Pearson and i-Ready PD for Math teachers, along with coaching from Columbia-CPET ● Targeted PD from District and MFSC staff regarding ELLs and SWDs and Social Studies pedagogy ● Parent workshops will be developed to share findings in staff PD and share enrichment opportunities for off-campus learning Teacher teams will be given time to work during the school day to support student growth  Circular 6 periods will be used for unit and lesson planning, supporting literacy across the content areas, and teacher development Funds will be set aside for teachers to attend professional development   Teachers will be given time to plan Word Generation and other MSQI-related activities Students Teachers Admin July 2018-June 2019 Admin MSQI coordinator Teachers Teachers Students July 2018- June 2019 Admin Teachers MSQI Coordinator 3  Math teachers will be given an extra period per week to plan as a department with support from CPET and District and MFSC staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly PA and SLT meetings Monthly family oriented events held at school Magnet School Specialist Parent Coordinator Academic Parent Teacher Team meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session funds Per Diem funds Supplies and fees for parent events Fees for professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will have participated in 2 data cycles analyzing data from periodic assessments as measured by a 4% increase in school-wide average for Danielson 3D. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from MOSL and DRP assessments 4  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The administration and staff are exploring ways to share the responsibility for developing high academic expectations for students and ensuring students’ social-emotional well-being. This year, the focus will be to engage families and community stakeholders to have more involvement in the planning and implementation of programs meeting the diverse needs of the school. The school has planned several events that engage families with community resources such as the NYPD, Planned Parenthood, financial literacy classes, and social and emotional development for families. As a result, the school’s ability to engage families to share in the responsibility for developing student success is continuing to improve, and by the end of the year, we seek to have a 10% increase in families that participate in school-wide events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through School Leadership Team and Parent Association meetings focused on improving parental participation resulting in a 10% increase in parent participation as measured by PCAR reports. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Aug 2018-June 2019 Counselor Parent Coordinator Admin Teachers Parent Association Implement SEL program through RULER and OSYD supports Students ● Implement RULER, a Yale University based program designed to build emotional intelligence in students Parents Teachers ● Program designed to build vocabulary for ELLs and SWDs ● Parents will attend an implementation workshop in October and receive ongoing support and info during Parents Association meetings ● Parents and students have an open line of communication with administration and guidance counselors to address concerns and request support Communication Efforts Parents July 2018-June 2019 Magnet Specialist ● School website and Jupiter grades for parent outreach Teachers Parent Coordinator ● Translation and Interpretation unit will provide necessary accommodations Students Community Community Associate ● Social media (Facebook, twitter, Jupiter grades) ● All school events will be posted via school website for transparency Planning family engagement events with community organizations Students Parents August 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Magnet Specialist  Distribute translated flyers and announcements for families  Plan and facilitate curriculum nights for parents to gain a better understanding of the curriculum and to support their child's learning outside of school.  Coordinate community engagement events with organizations such as the NYPD, Planned Parenthood, and New York Presbyterian-Columbia Hospitals Community Partners Admin Teachers Parent Association School Leadership Team 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Community Associate Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Jupiter Grades costs Website hosting fees Per session for after school activities Printing costs for advertisements Food costs for parent events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, WPA will have planned, organized, and executed six parent engagement events that demonstrate a 10% increase in parent participation. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Coordinator Activity Reports (PCAR) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) DPR NYSTests iReadyand NYSTests MOSL Data, course work MOSL Data, course work -student observations -parent requests Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) NewsELAprogram Small Group iReadyMath Small Group Daily Daily Tutoring Tutoring Small group After School Small Group After school Coaching and counseling sessions. Individual and small group Daily counseling and SBSTteam services InitialIEPcase management 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 14 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Buying uniforms, book bags and school supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We partner the NYC Teaching Collaborative Fellows to develop and recruit new teachers to West Prep in addition to partnering with Teachers College-Columbia to support student teachers in the Students with Disabilities department. We sponsor a week-long series of professional development during the summer for teachers to ensure their preparedness for the school year. All teachers are programmed according to their certification in order to ensure students are learning from highly qualified staff members in each subject. Ample funds are set aside for professional development and staff retreats to retain and support teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We use our Circular 6 period for professional development. Teachers are engaged in PD 5 days a week. Three days they are in grade team meetings and twice a week they are in dept meetings. These sessions are focused, there is a lesson plan created by the facilitator, and productive. Coaches are developed at Harvard Institute, through the Teacher Leadership Program and MSFC PD. Teachers visit each anothers classrooms in cycles and provide feedback, aligned to the Danielson framework. Administrators and coaches perform mini-observations daily and provide verbal and written feedback to teachers. Teacher leaders and administrators have a weekly cabinet meeting to ensure that we all continue to develop and offer best practices Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school has a committee made of teachers and administrators to determine all assessments given during the year. Teachers have choice over local and state assessment measures. Teachers met during the summer and in consultation with school administration decided to use Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) Assessments for reading and ELA, i-Ready and Pearson baseline assessments for math, and NYC Performance Tasks for Science and Social Studies. Teachers will use Monday afternoons to review, score, examine test data and item analyses for the purpose of adjusting instruction to support the overall goals of the school. Teachers have created departmental professional development plans that address improving instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 3  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 110057 0 0 0 1749609 X X 5B (Supportive Environment) 5B-5E (All programs) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 4  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. West Prep Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. . Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students . West Prep Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 6  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 7  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) West Prep Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 8  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 9  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 0  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 3 School Name West Prep Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 421 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carland Washington Coach Jennifer Shea ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Andrea Hinojosa Teacher/Subject Area Nicole Feliciano Teacher/Subject Area Social Studies Related-Service Provider Brooke Somech Superintendent Ilene Altschul Assistant Principal Jesse Kupferman Coach Tunisia Bristol School Counselor Carlos Munoz Parent Shamel Flowers Parent Coordinator Adam Kearns Field Support Center Staff Member Fanny Castro Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 206 2 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.74%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 4 3 1 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? West Prep Academy initially identifies the literacy levels of its ELLs by giving them a Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment at the beginning of the year. Students take the assessment a total of three times for the school year to track the literacy growth. Students are expected to grow at least three points between assessments. The data collected from DRP allows teachers to present material that is appropriate yet academically challenging to improve students' literacy levels. Furthermore, students are given formal and informal assessments throughout the year, which allows teachers to identify and focus on their particular learning needs. This includes providing instruction on vocabulary, grammar, reading strategies, and writing as needed for each student. The ENL teacher plans and facilitates language objectives based on the students' academic needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3  The ENL provider participates in weekly ELA department meetings to evaluate student work and improve protocols to meet the needs of the ELL population. All literacy data from school-wide assessments, such as the DRP, to class essays are examined and discussed by the entire team of teachers in order to determine next steps in instruction and intervention. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As previously mentioned, the DRP is administered at the beginning of the school year in September in order to identify the grade level at which students’ comprehend a written work. In addition to the DRP, students complete an essay at the beginning of the school year, which is scored by their ELA teachers and referred to as a baseline. Throughout the year as students learn and grow academically, they will complete other summative assessments, typically in short response and essay form. In department teams, teachers evaluate the areas of growth and areas where students will need more support. Since teachers record their notes in a shared Google Drive document, they are able to refer to their notes to track their students’ academic evolution. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? For school-wide assessments such as the New York State ELA and Math exams, the DRP, the academic vocabulary learning initiative called Word Generation, or the Performance Series, the entire teaching staff meets and evaluates student data. The staff analyzes the data and shares conclusions drawn from it. From this analysis, an intervention plan is generated and implemented. This may include restructuring existing small intervention groups or creating new ones. Department teams meet weekly during after school professional development hours on Mondays to provide an opportunity for teachers to collaborate and share in order to improve their academic outcomes. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] During the data analysis meetings mentioned above, the ENL teacher is responsible for looking at patterns among the ELL population to determine any areas of needs specific to them. She is proactive about suggesting ELL students for small intervention groups who may not have already been identified as needing extra support and follows up with the teachers leading those groups in order to ensure the ELLs’ language needs are considered. Similarly, during weekly professional development sessions with department and grade teams, the ENL teacher responds to the evidence in the data that indicates the ELLs areas of growth and areas where more support is needed by discussing the findings with her colleagues and developing actionable next steps. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Multiple assessments are analyzed to develop an informed understanding of each ELL student’s academic abilities. In addition to the state exams (e.g. NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, NYS Math), data is also collected from the DRP, which is administered at the beginning of the school year. Baseline assessments, which are administered by content area teachers, are also evaluated. If available, short responses, essays, and other academic assignments are evaluated. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? As previously mentioned, the data from all assessments are evaluated and discussed in grade and department teams at the beginning of the school year and later throughout the year during professional development sessions on Mondays and Tuesdays. During these times, the ENL teacher shares insights pertinent to the academic advancement of the ELL popuation. Part IV: ELL Programming 4  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. While all students receive integrated ENL instruction in content area classes in their specific grade classes, which is predominantly composed of non-ELLs, according to the time mandated by the CR Part 154, some students receive additional time. Entering students, for instance, receive stand alone instruction for one period (45 minutes) a day four days a week. Emerging, Transitional, and a select few Expanding students also receive stand alone ENL instruction in an ungraded, heterogeneous group during Strategic Reading, a small group reading intervention class, for one period four days a week. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL students are given at least 180-360 minutes of weekly integrated ENL instruction based on their proficiency level. The ENL teacher mostly provides integrated instruction in content area classes while offering two stand alone classes. One solely for Entering students and another for Entering, Emerging, Transitional, and a few Expanding ELLs. Both of these stand alone classes meet for 45 minutes four days a week. The ENL teacher ensures that the minutes are met by discussing scheduling at the beginning of the school year with administration. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As a majority of ENL instruction occurs through integrated co-teaching, the content area teachers collaborate and co-plan with the ENL teacher in order to ensure that language instruction occur within and alongside content instruction. This involves creating language objectives for the lesson, which includes but is not limited to vocabulary, discourse, grammar, etc. In addition, the entire school engages in an academic vocabulary learning program called Word Generation. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? West Prep scholars whose home language is indicated as Spanish are evaluated by the Spanish LAB when they are first enrolled. Given that English is the language of instruction in the freestanding ENL program, the informal assessments are given in English. Therefore, the student’s English is primarily evaluated. However, if the ENL teacher is fluent in the student’s home language, she may utilize her knowledge to evaluate the student’s home language development. Nevertheless, ENL teacher will consider the student’s ability and comfort engaging with their home language in academic context through an interview or another assessment. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 5  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently, there are no SIFE students at West Prep Academy. If a student is identified as a SIFE, they will be administered the LENS. Once the results of the LENS are returned, the certified ENL teacher will be able to differentiate the instructional strategies based on the individual needs of the students. Newcomers have more intense lessons on grammar, syntax and the patterns of phonemic awareness and for some, graphophonemic basics, in addition to basic reading and academic language study. The Developing ELLs are given more of a focus on strategies for essay writing such as scaffolds, using dictionaries and organization tools. They are also given reading strategies such as Author's purpose, how to manipulate the three literacy cues, gaining context from their life experiences. They are taught how to cite text evidence when answering short and long responses for state exams, including the NYSESLAT. The long term ELLs are given the tools to revise, edit and restructure their work, in order to meet the needs of the project assigned. They are taught how to define words from the context of the text. Former ELLs are placed in classes with current ELL students and continue to receive language development through integrated ENL instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Scholars at West Prep Academy are provided with scaffolds such as thinking maps, dictionaries (picture, English only, and Spanish-English), glossaries, manipulatives, visual media, and large print books/texts that have space for annotations. In addition, students are taught how to "stop and jot," paraphrase, summarize, and use writing methods such as TEAL to help them expand their short responses and essays with relevant and convincing evidence. Frequently, the ENL teacher attends the weekly Special Education department meetings to assist the Special Education service providers in ensuring that the needs of the ELL-SWD population is met. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Scholars with IEPs who are ELLs at West Prep Academy participate in integrated and stand alone ENL instruction with a certified ENL teacher. The ENL teacher views and applies the scaffolds dictated on their IEPs in conjunction with any language-based scaffolds in order to help the student achieve both content and language learning objectives. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At West Prep Academy, the certified ENL teacher works closely with the ELA and Humanities teachers to identify language demands of the content area and create language objectives to ensure that the lessons are accessible to the ELLs in that class. In weekly and daily co-planning meetings, teachers share their concerns and strategize language supports for ELLs. The same is true for STEM classes. When communicating with the mathematics and science teachers, the academic language that will be used is gone over, to enable the ENL teacher to prepare the students for the vocabulary they will encounter through pre-reading activities and explicit instruction. The methods of various forms of writing (as they apply to various subjects) is reviewed by the ENL teacher, and their final published drafts are reviewed. If progress is not made, different approaches are taken. For those students who are having extreme difficulty in learning phonemic awareness, Wilson is offered. Just Words is also available for students who need additional support with vocabulary acquisition. For mathematics, there are class periods with both small group teacher led instruction and a computer program called "iXL". 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The administration of West Prep Academy has implemented "Word Generation," a program that utilizes explicit vocabulary instruction to teach high frequency academic words to improve the literacy level of all students. This program utilizes language acquisition strategies that research demonstrates are effective for ELLs. In addition, Spanish as a foreign language will be offered as an elective. The student population consists of a significant amount of Spanish speakers, even though many are not classified as ELLs. The elective will serve to improve the Spanish of both our ELL and non-ELL Spanish-speakers while also 6  offering our non-Spanish speakers an opportunity to expand their language skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded any and all access to after school programs that native English speakers have access to, including REEL Works, sports, and the performing arts. ELLs spend most of their day in their classes with their native English-speaking peers. As such, they are well-integrated, active members of the school community. Like all West Prep scholars, ELLs participate in Titan Studio classes, an elective of their choice, as well as Art, Health, DrumLine, and their content area classes. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs have access to dictionaries (English only, English-Spanish, and picture), the SMART board, iPads, laptops, desktop Macs, onset and rime flashcards, blend and diagraph charts, notebooks, pens, pencils, visual media, manipulatives. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Translation dictionaries (e.g. English only, English-Spanish, and picture), visual media and manipulatives are brought in during each lesson. The ENL teacher may rely on her own knowledge of the student’s home language to make connections between the home language and English when delivering instruction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At West Prep Academy, there is constant communication with the ELA and Humanities teachers, this allows us to all be aware of the achievements shown across the board with the students. When communicating with the mathematics and science teachers, the academic language that will be used is gone over, to enable the ENL teacher to prepare the students for the vocabulary they will encounter. The methods of various forms of writing (as they apply in various subjects) is reviewed in ENL, and their final published drafts are reviewed and if progress is not made, different approaches are taken. For those students who are having extreme difficulty in learning phonemic awareness, Wilson is in place. For mathematics, there are AIS periods with both small group teacher led instruction and a computer program called "iXL". Students who are found to be entitled to speech services are provided such by the bilingual speech teacher, Ms. Brooke Somech. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ENL teacher regularly attends department and grade team meetings in order to disseminate information, share materials, and support the ELL population’s content and language development. The ENL teacher also develops new materials and resources when there is a need. The constant communication and collaboration between the ENL teacher through the co-teaching relationships and weekly meetings ensures that resources are shared and the staff understands and addresses the ELLs’ specific needs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Scholars at West Prep Academy who are newly entering the 6 th grade are invited to participate in the Summer Bridge program which has been created in order to assist former elementary school students entering the middle school environment. This is hosted by the principal, Carland Washington and the 6 th grade team and the certified ESL teacher. Scholars who enroll during the school year are given tours by the parent coordinator and if they are in 8 th grade they will be seen by the guidance couselor, Carlos Munoz, in order to assist them in their high school application process. The magnet specialist, Cidalia Costa will ensure that they are up to date with all of the necessary permission slips to be filmed, as West Prep is a magnet school and is often in the media for its positive activities. 7  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Scholars at West Prep Academy are given the option to study Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The certified ESL teacher attends workshops from the city and state of New York, as well as literacy professional learning sessions, from independent companies such as Scholastic Books. The ESL teacher will then return to West Prep Academy and will turn key the information to the other teachers during the Monday 50 minute professional development time after the regular school day. There is professional learning offered to the ESL teacher and the other teachers of ELLs in the building through both the NYC Department of Education as well as the NYS Education Department. There are independent professional learning opportunities from companies such as Scholastic and Pearson as well. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Scholars at West Prep Academy who are newly entering the 6th grade are invited to participate in the Summer Bridge program which has been created in order to assist former elementary school students entering the middle school environment. This is hosted by the principal, Carland Washington and the 6th grade team and the certified ESL teacher. Once the scholars at West Prep Academy are ready to move onto high school, they are given time with the counselor, Carlos Munoz, to discuss the some of the changes that they will encounter moving from the West Prep Academy environment to that of a larger high school. The certified ESL teacher attends workshops from the city and state of New York, as well as literacy professional learning sessions, from independent companies such as Scholastic Books. The ESL teacher will then return to West Prep Academy and will turn key the information to the other teachers during the Monday 50 minute professional development time after the regular school day. Records are kept by the payroll secretary, Samantha Speights through the agendas and copies of the attendance. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 8  Due to scheduling conflicts, the telephone has been the best means for which to update families on their ELL’s English language development in the parent's’ preferred language of contact. In the case that a face-to-face meeting is scheduled, West Prep has bilingual staff available to discuss the progress with Spanish-speaking families. The DOE Office of Translation and Interpretation Services will be contacted to provide oral interpretation via the telephone. Each meeting will be recorded in a Compliance Binder located in the ENL coordinator’s office. These meetings take place in the Spring after the NYSESLAT is administered. During parent activities such as individual meetings with parents, conferences, workshops, school leadership team meetings, Academic Parent Teacher Team meetings, and IEP meetings other-than-English language interpreters will be available to interpret for parents who need to participate in their native language. Staff will be present to provide oral interpretation for Spanish. Staff who act as interpreters will be trained on maintaining confidentiality and on the briefing, interpretation, and debriefing process. The DOE Office of Translation and Interpretation Services or a contracted vendor will be contacted to provide oral interpretation in person or via telephone when school personnel are not able to provide the requested language(s) services. Records of parental attendance are kept through attendance records which are kept by the teachers. Parents meet with the certified ENL teacher in the spring for a more formal one on one meeting, and the records for that formal meeting will be kept by the ENL coordinator. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. • Parents participate in Student Led Conferences, where their child updates them of their academic progress. (This is in lieu of parent teacher conferences.)• Curriculum nights at the beginning of the school year offer parents an opportunity to preview the content and skills students will be engaging in for the academic school year. • Tuesday afternoons are reserved for meetings and phone calls made for parent engagement and outreach.• Parents participate in Academic Parent Teacher Team meetings where they view data about their child’s progress and learn ELA and math skills that will enable them to help their child with their homework. • There are events throughout the year where local companies and restaurants perform cooking demonstrations and invite the parents to attend to learn how to recreate the dishes they sample. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carland Washington, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: M421 Superintendent: Ilene DBN: 03 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kalilah Clarke School Aide Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The language needs of the parents and guardians at West Prep Academy were identified using a variety of methods and in a variety of ways during interactions and contact with parents. We consulted ATS reports for initial identification of home languages other-than-English spoken by parents of students at West Prep. Information on parent language needs was collected from parents and gleaned from the sources and methods listed below: • Home languages of students in school indicated in ATS • Home Language Surveys were reviewed and language needs were identified • A school-generated survey was also distributed to check accuracy of previously acquired information 2  • Evaluations completed by parents during parent meetings, parent conferences, and other parent activities. • Documentation of language needs from face-to-face encounters with parents • Language needs identified by parents during IEP conferences • Language needs identified by parents on registration and attendance forms • Language needs identified by parents to Parent Coordinator, PTA, and Language Access Coordinator during individual and group meetings • Language needs as determined by language of written communication to teachers and other staff received from parents • Review of translated written correspondences sent home to parents in the past. • Information on the emergency contact cards (blue cards) to ensure that parents were communicated with in their preferred languages. In sum, the School Leadership Team of West Prep assessed ATS reports for languages spoken at the school and current interpretation needs. Our SLT team meetings in September were devoted to English as a New Language presentations for parents and CEP writing with an emphasis on LAP. We have an electronic document that is sorted by grade and class that is updated regularly with the languages parents speak. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Wolof Arabic 200 27 3 1 86 11 1.15 0.38 86 9 3 0 86 11 1.15 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Arabic, French, Japanese, Mandinka, Wolof Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 3  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. • These items, as they have been utilized in the past, have already been translated. •Any new documents will be given to the DOE Translation Service no less than a month before the document is to be distributed. distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families West Prep Academy disseminates the following materials in the languages identified by parents in which they wish to be communicated: • Report cards September 2017 • Progress Reports • Student Led Conferences (Parent Teacher Conferences): November 17-18; March 30-31 • School calendars • Invitations to family nights: November 12 • After School program literature • NYS testing dates and recommendations for parental support for their scholars • City Wide Discipline codes • West Prep Academy discipline codes- cell phones, uniform policy, lateness policy. • Extra educational opportunities- Saturday school, extended day opportunities • Newsletters to the families The school will submit documents for translation 2 weeks prior to the events dated above. • City Wide Discipline codes September 2017 • West Prep Academy discipline codes- cell phones, uniform policy, lateness policy. • These items, as they have been utilized in the past, have already been translated. •Any new documents will be given to the DOE Translation Service no 4  • Extra educational opportunities- Saturday school, extended day opportunities • Newsletters to the families The school will submit documents for translation 2 weeks prior to the events dated above. N/A N/A less than a month before the document is to be distributed. N/A N/A N/A N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to • We have Student Led Conferences, in lieu of parent teacher conferences: November 17-18; March 30-31 September 2017 • Curriculum nights at the beginning of the school year • Tuesday afternoons are reserved for meetings and phone calls made for parent engagement and outreach • The guidance counselor makes calls throughout the day September 2017 • There are events throughout the year where local companies and restaurants perform cooking demonstrations and invite the parents to attend and learn how to recreate the dishes they sample The school will submit documents for translation 2 weeks prior to the events dated above. N/A N/A N/A N/A provide interpretation service(s)? • These items, as they have been utilized in the past, have already been translated. •Any new documents will be given to the DOE Translation Service no less than a month before the document is to be distributed. • These items, as they have been utilized in the past, have already been translated. •Any new documents will be given to the DOE Translation Service no less than a month before the document is to be distributed. N/A N/A 5  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, the family will be contacted on the phone. The staff member will contact the DOE Translation Service hotline and receive translation to either talk with the child’s family member or to leave a message. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members who work in the front office will receive a copy of the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663, where the main points of the document will be reviewed by the Language Access Coordinator and/or the ENL coordinator. The rest of the staff will receive an overview of the main points of the document at the beginning of the school year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The ESL teacher/coordinator will speak at the initial parent information session with translators who will be able to target languages that no one else on staff can speak, this will allow them to be made aware of the pertinent information given. Welcome banners will be produced with the various indicated languages presented. There will be a poster created for the security desk in order to show the parent what they need to present to the security staff. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Jupiter Ed. system allows for parents to email the staff (teachers and administrators alike) to ensure constant communication on their satisfaction of the availability of services. In addition, each staff member is given their own West Prep Academy email address to ensure optimal parent feedback. The Department of Education also conducts their own parental survey, in which they are abloe to voice their opinion on the services received from West Prep Academy. 6 
