 02M551 School Name: URBAN ASSEMBLY NEW YORK HARBOR SCHOOL Principal: JEFFREY CHETIRKO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Urban Assembly New York Harbor School 310200011551 9-12 School Number (DBN): 02M551 10 South Street, Slip 7, New York, NY 10004 212-458-0800 Phone Number: 212-458-0801 Fax: Jeffrey Chetirko jchetir@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jeffrey Chetirko Michael Vlahovic Alice Tse Sarah Gribbin N/A Liam Daretany Robert Wigren Pete Malinowski Affinity Schools CUNY/UA Geographical District: Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7th Ave. Manhattan, NY 10001 FWalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3754 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax:   The Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, 6th floor aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jeffrey Chetirko Michael Vlahovic Nan Richardson Jessica Cuevas TylerScott Simpson QuincyMalone Pete Malinowski Clara Owen Rick Lee *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Andre Amrhein Rachel Morales LissaWolfe Lisa Edstrom Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of the school is to provide a college-preparatory education built upon New York City’s maritime experience that inst ills in students the ethics of environmental stewardship and the skills associated with careers on the water.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Located in the heart of New York Harbor, and accessible only by ferry, Urban Assembly New York Harbor School offers a unique, on-water learning experience for all its students. Students learn to build and operate boats; spawn and harvest millions of oysters; design submersible, remotely-operated vehicles; conduct real-life research; and dive underwater. Students go on trips, tour colleges, hear and learn from experts in science and industry, and participate in the school’s on-going oyster restoration research program. The maritime programs of Harbor School are supported through funding provided by New York Harbor Foundation, a nonprofit organization dedicated to improving the condition of, and promoting access to and education about, New York Harbor. New York Harbor Foundation seeks to achieve these objectives by conducting research and outreach activities, and designing and running services to improve the quality of the Harbor. The Professional Advisory Committee (PAC) at Harbor School is comprised of over sixty professionals from industry and higher education. Members team up with our school’s CTE instructors to advise on curriculum and work-based learning opportunities, college programs, and career pathways. The PAC meets annually in a General Session and, at least, one additional time in Sub Committees for each of the school’s six CTE programs of study. Strengths of the school include the integration of the instructional shifts into the CTE curricula to incorporate literacy, technology, scientific research, and real world applications that offer college and career readiness. Additionally, the school effectively uses partnerships with The Harbor Foundation, industry partners and university partners support the school’s mission of preparing students for college and careers. The School Leadership Team provides a space for all stakeholders to discuss school wide concerns and to have a voice in decisions being made. Additionally, teachers actively seek opportunities to take on leadership roles and to have a voice in the decisions of the school community. Currently, the greatest need of the school community is to have a more cohesive and coherent school wide academic language where teachers are using similar approaches to learning using the Habits of Mind. For this reason, the instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year will be connected to improving questioning and discussion techniques, and assessment practices across the Harbor School community, while using the Habits of Mind as the common language in all classrooms. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are.  24% Population of students with IEP's: meeting the needs of students in ICT classrooms, SETSS counseling, Occupational Therapy and Physical Therapy  4% Population of ENL Students  Diversity of Population is 40% Hispanic, 18% Black, 30% White, 7% Asian, and 55% Economically Disadvantaged. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year.  According to Learning Survey data and information from Parent Events throughout the year, our school has shown progress in: Trust; Effective School Leadership, and Family-Community Ties  According to Quality Review data, observation trends and regents score data, our Key Areas of Focus are: Rigorous Instruction and Collaborative Teachers 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M551 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 534 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 3 6 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 40 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 54.0% % Attendance Rate 47.9% % Reduced Lunch 2.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 39.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 29.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 3% 32% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 86% 85% 77.4% 7.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 95 84 26 89.3% 5.4% 21.7% 17.8% 7.1% 6.2% 2 26% 6.2 N/A N/A 86% 87% 88.7% 27% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our January 2017 Quality Review, our school received a “Developing” for QR Indicator 1.2. The report stated: “Although the principal, teachers, and students described a school-wide focus on annotation and students citing evidence in their writing and speaking, this practice was not consistently observed across the majority of classrooms visited. In one history class, while there was evidence of students annotating the text they had just read, some students could not explain how this practice was helping them understand the text.” Informed by Capacity Framework Element – Rigorous Instruction, current data and our most recent QR, there is a need to improve on: (a) providing teachers the appropriate professional development, (b) informing parents on common core expectations and supports, (c) implementing common core materials in classrooms and (d) creating opportunities to provide According to the 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey, under Rigorous Instruction:  81% of students say that they are learning a lot in their classes at their school to prepare them for the next level or grade. (Q4a)  73% of students say that their classes at their school make them think critically. (Q4g)  42% of students say that they are challenged in their classes. (Q5a)  55% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions on tests. (Q5b)  48% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions in class. (Q5c)  57% of students say that they work in small groups. (Q5d)  67% of students say that teachers want students to become better thinkers, not just memorize things. (Q5e)  87% of teachers say that students feel challenged. (Q20a)  71% of teachers say that students have to work hard to do well. (Q20c)  71% of teachers say that students respond to challenging test questions. (Q20e)  55% of teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class. (Q20g) According to the 2017-18 NYC School Performance dashboard, the Urban Assembly New York Harbor School has a 34% College Readiness Index, 4-years. This is 13% below the city average (47%) and 15% below comparison schools (49%). The Urban Assembly New York Harbor School has a 35% College Readiness Index, 6-years. This is on par with the city average (35%) and 21% below comparison schools (56%). The Urban Assembly New York Harbor School has a 5% College Readiness Index for students in the lowest third. This is 7% below the city average (12%) and 10% below comparison schools (15%). 2  According to the 2017-18 School Quality Guide, the Urban Assembly New York Harbor School is "approaching" (2.14*) in rigorous instruction. *School practices and conditions (measured by Quality Review and NYC School Survey) that drive student achievement. Scores are on scale from 1.00 - 4.99. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will deepen rigor of our longitudinal literacy framework and vertical math scope and sequence across grade levels as evidenced by a 10% increase in students meeting college readiness benchmarks in both ELA and Math Regents, from 34% to 44%. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principals of Instruction, Peer Collaborative Teachers Designated time and support for Unit planning and alignment of unit planning in Professional Learning Series time. All teachers September-May Designated administrators for grade team and departments to ensure clear coordination between and amongst grade teams and departments. Department meetings during the school day a minimum of 1 times per week. Instructional Rounds groups meet once a week to debrief with teachers and inform next steps for the groups. Weekly meeting between administration and Department Leaders to provide professional development and support. Hired two Peer Collaborative Teachers to support teachers in unit planning and implementation of units. Hired two Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCTs) to support teachers with unit planning, whole group professional development, and one-on-one coaching. Teachers October-May Peer Collaborative Teachers, Teachers, Administrators One of the PCTs works with Advanced Placement for All and works specifically on vertical planning to create "pre-AP courses" in core subjects with and emphasis in math and ELA. Vertical and longitudinal planning is the focus on department meeting work this year. 4  Our Professional Learning Series cycle focuses on triad groups made up of people from the same department that will meet once a week. These groups work in a 2 week cycle that includes unit and lesson plan review, then inter-visitation to observe the lesson plan and then a lesson and unit plan debrief. Teachers October-May Peer Collaborative Teachers, Teachers, Administrators The two Peer Collaborative Teachers are working with teachers on the planning component of teaching via individual meetings and whole group professional development. During grade team meetings there is an emphasis on sharing of curricula and standards between CTE teachers and academic teachers in order to identify areas for interdisciplinary lessons, projects and units. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers September-May All teachers, grade team leaders, Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  School Leadership Team will meet on a monthly basis throughout the year to discuss and review instructional advances and professional development calendar for teachers  PTA will meet on a monthly basis and receive updates from the parent coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. 2 part-time Peer Collaborative Teachers support improving teacher practice for new teachers (Math Department) 2. 30 Per diem days to hire substitutes who will cover classes so that classroom teacher can engage in scheduled inter visitations and visits to our Urban Assembly schools. 3. 1 period of common planning time for the department. 4. 1 period of common planning time for each ICT co-teacher. 5. Curricular materials (student texts and documents) to supplement our curriculum 6. 350 hours of per session for planning, curriculum development, data analysis, etc. 7. Materials for parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  By February 2019, we will an increase in students meeting college readiness benchmarks in both ELA and Math Mock Regents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Credit Accumulation on transcript reports.  Graduation Tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Survey:  52% of students say that most students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions. (Q6a)  54% of students say that most students follow the rules in class. (Q6b)  55% of students say that most students pay attention when they are supposed to. (Q6c)  55% of students say that most students work when they are supposed to. (Q6d)  40% of students say that most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching. (Q6e)  48% of teachers say that students listen carefully when the teacher gives directions. (Q20b)  68% of teachers say that students follow the rules in class. (Q20d)  61% of teachers say that students pay attention when they are supposed to. (Q20f)  73% of teachers say that students do their work when they are supposed to. (Q20h)  50% of teachers say that students behave well in class even when the teacher isn't watching. (Q20i) According to OORS data, Suspensions from September-June 2017-18 were 59 (an increase of 26%). Suspensions from September - June Suspensions, 2016-17 were 47.  2017-18 Breakdown of suspensions show an uneven match of student population: American Indian/ Alaskan (6%), Asian (7%), Black (41%), Hispanic (36%), Multi-racial (3%), White (8%).  2017-18 Breakdown of suspensions show an uneven match of student population: Special Education (39%), and General Education (61%).  2017-18 Breakdown of suspensions show an uneven match of student population: Males (93%), and Females (7%). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will decrease principal and superintendent suspensions by 20%, from 59 to 47 suspensions. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Creation of a Behavior Support Team, which is made up of the principal, assistant principals, full time dean, guidance counselor, social worker and schools aides. Create a Calendar of monthly themes for academic and personal behaviors. Establish a ladder of discipline. Train teachers on Skedula anecdotal and follow through. Creation of restorative committee that includes daily updates, a pilot detention program, and the launch of restorative justice circles. Committee is led by Dean and includes advising from administration, guidance, teachers and students. Clear articulation of daily supervision posts with school safety, school aides, administration and teachers so that hallways, lunch time, premises and ferry are adequately and thoroughly supervised. Daily morning musters with relevant team members to address immediate and pressing student related issues and concerns. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students Created by September; Meetings ongoing through June Dean, Guidance Counselors, Behavior Support Team, Administrators, School Aides, Social Worker All students, all teachers Created by September Dean, Guidance Counselor, Teachers All students August and January All students, all teachers September-June Dean, Guidance Counselor, Restorative Committee, Students Dean, Guidance Counselor, Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Skedula School Leadership Team   Remind App   CAASS  Phone logs  Restorative Committee updates Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Attendance Team members provided full time dean to perform duties related to behavior support 2. Special Education Coordinator provided .2 release time to perform duties related to serving the needs of students with IEPs 3. Paraprofessional hired to support ICT classrooms to allow for greater academic intervention services in the ICT classroom. 4. Special Education Coordinator and School Based Support Team collaborate to schedule IEP meetings 5. Urban Assembly PSO Support – 1 Coach supports the quality of special education services on a weekly basis. 6. Grade Team Meetings: members of the community who serve the student of focus invited by principal to participate in meeting facilitated by Guidance Counselor and Special Education Coordinator 7. SIT Team Meeting: monthly meeting scheduled and facilitated by Special Education Coordinator 8. Dean monitors anecdotal reports in Skedula and follows up with parents. 9. Grade-specific Positive Behavior Support Systems created to provide students with initiatives. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will decrease principal and superintendent suspensions by 20% in OORS from the same time in February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  OORS Reporting compared from previous years  Skedula data and tracking reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Informed by Capacity Framework Element – Rigorous Instruction, current data and our most recent QR, there is a need to improve on: (a) providing teachers the appropriate professional development, (b) informing parents on common core expectations and supports, (c) implementing common core materials in classrooms and (d) creating opportunities to provide additional support and in- and out-of the classroom to students in order to complete rigorous tasks. Overall Student data for credit accumulation:  95% of students in cohort graduating 2018 were on track for credit accumulation.  83% of students in cohort graduating 2019 were on track for credit accumulation.  85% of students in cohort graduating 2020 were on track for credit accumulation.  92% of students in cohort graduating 2021 were on track for credit accumulation.  88.5% of all students were on track for credit accumulation in 2017-18. Students in the lowest third data for credit accumulation:  55% of students in cohort graduating 2018 were on track for credit accumulation.  61% of students in cohort graduating 2019 were on track for credit accumulation.  73% of students in cohort graduating 2020 were on track for credit accumulation.  63% of students in cohort graduating 2021 were on track for credit accumulation.  63% of students in the lowest third were on track for credit accumulation in 2017-18. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will provide targeted instruction to all learners, as evidenced by a 3% increase in student credit accumulation, from 88.5% to 91.5%. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grade team leaders in 9th and 10th grade will utilize Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) data to adjust lesson plans, modify and select texts, and plan individual literacy interventions for students above and below grade level. 9th grade representative will turnkey information from StartSmart PLC hosted by Urban Assembly. All teachers, all students September-June School Leadership/ Grade Team Leaders/ Peer Collaborative Teachers Administration and Peer Collaborative Teachers will work with all departments to develop skills for analyzing student assessment data from both the Regents exams and in house assessments. Teachers will learn how to use this data to make strategic decisions around adapting unit plans and daily instruction to meet students’ needs both individually and in groups. Triad groups made up of people from the same department will meet once a week. These groups work in a 2 week cycle that includes unit and lesson plan review, then inter-visitation to observe the lesson plan and then a lesson and unit plan debrief. Peer Collaborative Teachers, all students September-June School Leadership, Peer Collaborative Teachers All teachers will implement discussion protocols that increase student voice and provide multiple entry points to the lesson. Lesson plans will be annotated with specific supports and strategies for different learners. Two Peer Collaborative Teachers are working with teachers on the planning component of teaching via individual meetings and whole group professional development. Work will include adjusting instruction to meet student need. Special Education co-teaching pairs are attending New Visions and Urban Assembly professional development around Math and Science content. In this training teachers visit special education lab sites and learn about planning for Integrated Co-Department teams, teacher September-June School Leadership, teachers 1 Taught classes. Interventions to target student need will be shared in grade and department team meetings. teams, students One teacher is attending an intensive Autism training workshop in order to facilitate in-house professional development based on her learnings. Multiple teachers in each grade will utilize Google Classroom and PupilPath to provide real-time information to students and parents. Information will include digitized lesson materials, feedback on mastery work, opportunities for lesson extension and support. Grade Teams, students, families September-June Teachers, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Leadership Team   PTA Minutes  Parent handbook  PD opportunities on Habits of Mind. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Professional Development Wednesdays: Teachers debrief instructional rounds and engage in Professional Development opportunities led by administrators, Peer Collaborative Teachers, and department leaders. 2. Peer Collaborative Teachers meet with individual teachers on a weekly basis. PCTs visit classrooms, debrief and provide next steps. Instructional cabinet will be created, made up of department leads, principal and assistant principals. instructional cabinet meet weekly to discuss Monday PD, mentoring and PCT assignments. 3. 4. 5. District 2 Talent Coach meets monthly with the principal to give feedback on written observation forms, visit classrooms, debrief visits and strengthen feedback. 6. Funds to pay teachers for per session and substitute teachers to cover classes 7. Principal attends monthly Principal’s meeting. 8. Assistant Principal attends monthly AP meeting. 9. Principal attends monthly instructional round support at other Urban Assembly schools. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  By February 2019, effective collaboration in planning and integrating unit plans across disciplines will lead to strengthened teacher practice, as evidenced by a 10% increase in the focus area of Domain 1e Planning and Preparation from 2.2 to 2.42. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Teaches Scholarship Reports Student Report Cards  Skedula Reports   ADVANCE Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Both Quality Review and Principal Practice Observation Visit feedback indicated 1.2 Pedagogy, 2.2 Assessment as areas of focus. In our January 2017 Quality Review, the reviewer wrote: “Across classrooms, teachers’ use peer and self-assessment practices varied. In the Marine Biology class, students worked in groups and then graded each other's work before sharing it with the entire class. In other classrooms visited, although students worked together, they did not peer or self-assess their work. This resulted in some students not being able to articulate what they were working on and why it was important. It also resulted in others, once they were stuck, not being able to complete the task.” Advance Data from 2017-18 suggests that the Urban Assembly New York Harbor School is developing (2.8) in Component 1e: Designing coherent instruction is the heart of planning, reflecting the teacher’s knowledge of content and of the students in the class, the intended outcomes of instruction, and the available resources. Such planning requires that educators have a clear understanding of the state, district, and school expectations for student learning and the skill to translate these into a coherent plan. It also requires that teachers understand the characteristics of the students they teach and the active nature of student learning. Educators must determine how best to sequence instruction in a way that will advance student learning through the required content. Furthermore, such planning requires the thoughtful construction of lessons that contain cognitively engaging learning activities, the incorporation of appropriate resources and materials, and the intentional grouping of students. Effective practice in this component recognizes that a well-designed instruction plan addresses the learning needs of various groups of students; one size does not fit all. At the highly effective level, the teacher plans instruction that takes into account the specific learning needs of each student and solicits ideas from students on how best to structure the learning. Advance Data from 2017-18 suggests that the Urban Assembly New York Harbor School is developing (2.8) in Component 3b: Questioning and discussion are the only instructional strategies specifically referred to in the Framework for Teaching, a decision that reflects their central importance to teachers’ practice. In the Framework, it is important that questioning and discussion be used as techniques to deepen student understanding rather than serve as recitation, or a verbal “quiz.” Good teachers use divergent as well as convergent questions, framed in such a way that they invite students to formulate hypotheses, make connections, or challenge previously held views. Students’ responses to questions are valued; effective teachers are especially adept at responding to and building on student responses and making use of their ideas. High-quality questions encourage students to make connections among concepts or events previously believed to be unrelated and to arrive at new understandings of complex material. Effective teachers also pose questions for which they do not know the answers. Even when a question has a limited number of correct responses, the question, being nonformulaic is likely to promote student thinking. Class discussions are animated, engaging all students in important issues and promoting the use of precise language to deepen and extend their understanding. These discussions may be based around questions formulated by the students themselves. Furthermore, when a teacher is building on student responses to questions (whether posed by the teacher or by other students), students are challenged to explain their thinking and to cite specific text or other evidence (for example, from a scientific experiment) to back up a position. This focus on argumentation forms the 4  foundation of logical reasoning, a critical skill in all disciplines. Not all questions must be at a high cognitive level in order for a teacher’s performance to be rated at a high level; that is, when exploring a topic, a teacher might begin with a series of questions of low cognitive challenge to provide a review, or to ensure that everyone in the class is “on board.” Furthermore, if questions are at a high level but only a few students participate in the discussion, the teacher’s performance on the component cannot be judged to be at a high level. In addition, during lessons involving students in small-group work, the quality of the students’ questions and discussion in their small groups may be considered as part of this component. In order for students to formulate high-level questions, they must have learned how to do so. Therefore, high-level questions from students, either in the full class or in small-group discussions, provide evidence that these skills have been taught. Based on the 2017-2018 Advance data, 16% of teachers were rated ineffective or developing in component 1e: Designing Coherent instruction Based on the 2017-2018 Advance data, 40% of teachers were rated ineffective or developing in component 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Based on the 2017-2018 Advance data, 40% of teachers were rated ineffective or developing in component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction on the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will receive targeted support, which will result in a 15% increase of all teachers’ rating scores on Danielson Framework Components: Planning (1e), and Discussion Protocols (3b) as measured by Advance’s Measure of Teaching Practice (MOTP) from 2.30 to 2.65. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning Series scope and sequence focuses on the development on unit planning and implementation of a Harbor School Unit Plan template in addition to the inclusion of instructional routines that promote student discourse. The unit plan template is annotated to include the Habits of Mind. Peer Collaborative Teachers and Triad Groups will demonstrate and provide feedback on well-planned and well-implemented discussion protocols/instructional routines that support student discourse. Completion of 4-6 Advance observations with specific, actionable feedback that is connected to professional development on assessments provided by administrator who is connected specifically to the department thus ensuring alignment. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers School Leadership; Team Leaders September - May (Wednesday PD Time) All teachers October-School Leadership May Incorporation of unit plan as part of the feedback process for teacher observations/ evaluations. All teachers October-May Using the school’s observation tracking system to monitor teacher observation data as a means of providing targeted coaching and differentiated professional development. All teachers October-May School Leadership; Team Leaders School Leadership; Team Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Leadership Team   PTA  Skedula Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Peer Collaborative Teachers working with teachers to provide teachers and paraprofessionals with increased instructional support. 2. Department Meetings- Teachers meet weekly to plan lessons to help support students to meet the demands of the common core task and to develop rubrics to assess student work. 6  3. Professional Development Wednesdays – Teachers debrief instructional rounds and engage in Professional Development opportunities led by the Peer Collaborative Teachers, department leaders, and administrators. Instructional cabinet will be created, made up of department leads, principal and assistant principal. 4. 5. The instructional cabinet meet weekly to discuss Wednesday PD and coaching assignments. 6. District 2 Talent Coach meets monthly with the principal to give feedback on written observation forms, visit classrooms, debrief visits and strengthen feedback. 7. Funds to pay teachers for per session and substitute teachers to cover classes 8. Principal attends monthly Principal’s meeting. 9. Assistant Principal attends monthly AP meeting. 10. Principal attends monthly instructional round support at other Urban Assembly schools. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will receive targeted support, which will result in a 10% increase of all teachers’ rating scores on Danielson Framework Components: Planning (1e), and Discussion Protocols (3b) as measured by Advance’s Measure of Teaching Practice (MOTP) from 2.8 to 3.1. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Advance MOTP  Peer Collaborative Coaching Notes  Google Classroom: Triad Notes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We understand that as a school, it is the utmost importance to establish a productive partnership with families to engage them in their children’s learning. Establishing a school as part of an intricate component within a community is extremely important. Participation and attendance to conferences, workshops and supporting events has not met our standards. We have been successful in communicating with parents the instructional needs of their children. Staff has worked hard in establishing a productive and trusting relationship with families. The Quality Review reported, “Parents stated that the school offers extensive information and resources about college and career readiness. The school provides students with an array of internships that further support the College and Technical Education (CTE) focus of Harbor School. All CTE programs organize industry visits and internships to expose students to careers in the fields of marine science and technology. Supporting families and student achievement is paramount. Presenting information in a way that will support parents and generate interests and ideas will be needed to increase participation and attendance. According to the 2016-17 School Survey only 85% of parents agree with the statement: "school staff regularly communicate with parents/guardians about how staff can help students learn." Current SLT and PTA participation does not accurately represent all students in the areas of: 40% Hispanic, 18% Black, 30% White, 7% Asian, 55% Economically Disadvantaged, and 21% Students with Disabilities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will strengthen support for all families as evidenced by an 40% increase in matching diversity of parent participation at school-sponsored events with current student diversity ; 40% Hispanic, 18% Black, 30% White, 7% Asian, 55% Economically Disadvantaged, and 21% Students with Disabilities. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will conduct meet and greets with parents in all five Boroughs. This removes the travel barrier that some parents face due to the difficulty of getting to Governors Island. Teachers, Parents September-June School Leadership, CTE Teachers Professional development for staff on parent involvement strategies and communication methods including technological support, and accountability for staff to use PupilPath more consistently. Professional development and support for using translation services to reach out to parents whose primary language is a language other than English. Grade teams support student goal-setting and progress monitoring throughout the school year by looking at and reflecting on data. Grade teams use protocols to analyze student academic progress and communicate concerns and celebrations with parents resulting in more frequent progress reports for parents regarding student progress. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers, parents October Principal, Parent Coordinator, ENL Teacher Teachers, parents, students Teachers, parents, students September-June Grade Team Leaders and Teachers September-June Teachers, Parent Coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. School Leadership   Monthly meetings with executive PTA board  Billion Oyster Project supports family and community engagement by engaging families in restoration of the New York Harbor. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  1. Teachers provide summer In-Dock sessions for in-coming students. Students spend three days on a sailboat building community amongst peers. 2. Social Worker, Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator facilitate workshop for parents. Provide resources for parents in need. 3. Food, space and materials for Parent Workshops. 4. Bacon and Egg Honor Roll – Honor roll students and parents have breakfast with New Tech staff to celebrate academic accomplishment. 5. Monthly SLT and PTA meetings – Holiday Dinner, Fund Raising Events, Workshops. 6. Skedula/ Pupil Path purchased to communicate academic progress to parents. 7. Teachers make phone calls and log on Skedula throughout the week. Parents are invited to Grade Team Meetings and morning meetings to meet with teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, we will strengthen support for all families as evidenced by a 25% increase in matching diversity of parent participation at school-sponsored events with current student diversity ; 40% Hispanic, 18% Black, 30% White, 7% Asian, 55% Economically Disadvantaged, and 21% Students with Disabilities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in Sheets from PTA and SLT   PCAR data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Protocol implemented by grade teams using student testing data and observations to identify students who need interventions/ types of interventions Protocol implemented by grade teams using student testing data and observations to identify students who need interventions/ types of interventions Protocol implemented by grade teams using student testing data and observations to identify students who need interventions/ types of interventions Protocol implemented by grade teams using student testing data and observations to identify students who need interventions/ types of interventions Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Office Hours; After School Credit Recovery; After School Regents Prep; Online coursework; Peer tutoring; Co-teaching (Special Education); LRE Office Hours; After School Credit Recovery; After School Regents Prep; Online coursework; Peer tutoring; Co-teaching (Special Education); LRE Office Hours; After School Credit Recovery; After School Regents Prep; Online coursework; Peer tutoring; Co-teaching (Special Education); LRE Office Hours; After School Credit Recovery; After School Regents Prep; Online coursework; Peer tutoring; Co-teaching (Special Education); LRE Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group; One-to-one; tutoring; online; whole class Before School After School Lunch Periods Small Group; One-to-one; tutoring; online; whole class Before School After School Lunch Periods Small Group; One-to-one; tutoring; online; whole class Before School After School Lunch Periods Small Group; One-to-one; tutoring; online; whole class Before School After School Lunch Periods 1  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEP mandated counseling; Recommendations by grade teams; Post-suspension support where necessary Counseling; Small Group; One-to-one Connecting students and families to outside services Throughout the day 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Not Title 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not Title 1 Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Title 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  Not Title 1 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Title 1 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 6  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Urban Assembly New York Harbor School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Urban Assembly New York Harbor School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Urban Assembly New York Harbor School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 0  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 1  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 3  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name Urban Assembly New York Harbor School Borough Manhattan School Number 551 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jeffrey Chetirko Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Leslie Chow Teacher/Subject Area Jeremy Lynch/CTE Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Aneal Healms Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent type here Parent Coordinator Ronni Ettinger Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 423 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs 0 0 6 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.42% 5  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The New York Harbor School has a small number of ELLs. Both the ENL teacher, ELA teachers, and content teachers are able to use data generated in class (teacher-created assessments, student participation, writing samples, informal observations and both summative and formative assessments) to fully understand the literacy skills of our ELLs, instead of relying only on standardized testing. We include in the data collection NYSELAT scores, LAB-R scores, Grade 9 scores, and information from periodic assessments, Common Core standards, and Regents exam scores to help give us an idea of how to design instruction to help our ELL population increase his/her English language skills yearly. Our school gives the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment three times a year. The score reports for this test gives us data on the English reading skills of our students, which we can then supplement with information about their literacy skills in their native language (if applicable) collected through the Spanish LAB-R or other native language assessment. 6  From the data we gather, we are able to modify and scaffold our curricula to better meet the literacy needs of ELLS by using a sheltered language approach, differentiated learning, and creating individualized goals for our ELLs based on our informal and formal data collection in a Push-In model to support the academic content of the following subjects: Math, English, Social Studies, and Science. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Grade Teams, Department teams and an Inquiry Team. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The New York Harbor School evaluates the success of our program for ELLs based on a number of factors: NYSESLAT scores, growth and pass rates on required exams, credit accumulation, teacher, parent, and student anecdotes, and student participation in school life. The school takes ELL participation and achievement seriously, and analyzes all data related to the efficacy of the program in order to see what changes need to be made immediately, or in the following year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We address interventions once summative data has been gathered in Grade Team Meetings. Teachers, guidance and administrators discuss results and make plans for groups of students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] This question is not applicable to our school. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The New York Harbor School currently has 0 Entering students, 0 Emerging students, 4 Transitioning students, 2 Expanding students and 0 Commanding students. The majority of our ELLs are in graades 9, 10, and 11. This year we have two new ELL students in the 9 th grade who placed in the Expanding category. Our ELLs are a complex and diverse group of students. Behind each ELL's data is a story, and we are the Harbor School do our best to learn, understand, and honor each student's unique experiences and situations. We look to the data to help us design instructional data to help improve our ELLs English language learning and we also work with the student in small and nurturing enviornment to help model best practices and healthy relationships with adults and peers. At the Harbor School, we work together in a collaborative environment in which content teachers, special education teacher, the Dean, and the ENL teacher work together as a team to implement best strategies to meet the academic and emotional needs of the ELL learner. At the Harbor School, we make sure to know each student as an individual so that we can create programs and opportunities that will strengthen the student as a learner and meet high school graduation requirements including mastering course work and passing the Common Core Regents exams. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Department Teams Part IV: ELL Programming 7  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Organizational Model Since we have only six ELL students, the New York Harbor School uses a Integrated ENL - 2 individually certified teachers model with one certified ESOL teacher and a 7-12 certified Content Area teacher. -supporting the literacy, language, and academic skills in the content area through reading authentic texts and writing on demand skills and/or decoding mathematical word problems to help solve real life problems. - incorporating research-based ESL instructional strategies that support diverse ELLs’ growth in all content areas and in literacy - promoting a multicultural, holistic approach to learning that includes a multitude of cultural learning opportunities, such as field trips, community speakers and partnerships, our unique Maritime Career Technology Education program and in-school events. b. Program Model The Harbor School programs ELLs in integrated ENL classes that are specifically designed to meet their individual needs. All ELLs are programmed into a 90 minute or 180 minute supported ENL class depending on the ELL's level. Because Harbor School only has four ELLs in grades 11 and 12, these students are included in the classes with non ELL students. If and when Harbor School has more students at grades 11-12 and 2 in grade 9. ENL classes will be separated into grade bands (9-10, 11-12). In addition to this class, Intermediate and Beginner students must be programmed into ENL resource rooms with a certified ENL instructor. The purpose of resource room is to support ELLs’ progress in their mainstream content area classes, while also strategically providing extra opportunities for English language development. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL coordinator (who is also the ESL instructor) works diligently with administration to ensure that all students are receiving the required number of minutes as per CR Part 154-2 (9-12) English as a New Language (ENL) Units of Study and Staffing Requirements. Entering (Beginning) receive 3 units of study per week 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Emerging students receive 2 units or 360 minutes of ESL a week. Transitioning students receive 1 unit or 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week and .5 unit of study in ENL/ Core Content area, and Expanding receive 1 unit per study per week and 1 unit of study in ENL/Core Content area. Commanding recieve servies for an additional two years and .5 units of study per week of integrated ENL in ELA/Core Content area Throughout the year, the ENL Coordinator works with the guidance team and programming coordinators to make sure that all ELLs are being appropriately served. With the addition of the resource room classes to our program, some students are actually receiving more than the minimum ENL instructional time, without any detriment to their credit accumulation or content-area learning. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 8  With the exception of Entering and Emerging ELLs, who are not programmed for mainstream ELA classes, all students are programmed at minimum for classes in the following content areas: ELA, History/Social Studies, Science, and Math. Because Harbor School is a Career and Technical Education school, all ELLs also take a CTE course each year. Depending on the flexibility of students’ schedules, they also take Art, P.E./Health, and Electives. The ENL coordinator/teacher acts as a consultant with content area teachers in order provide appropriate instruction and support for ELLs. All content area classes are taught in English; however, bilingual resources are provided for students in the form of bilingual peer partners or tutors, native langauge textbooks, dictionaries, glossaries, translations or summaries, bilingual websites, etc. Throughout the school year, the ENL coordinator/teacher works with teachers to improve their instructional methods for ELLs, specifically through modifying or amplifying materials, researching alternative resources, suggesting strategies, providing scaffolds such as graphic organizers, or providing students with extra support in ENL resource room. She also focuses on helping content area teachers learn and implement strategies for strategically incorporating language learning into their classes. While these strategies are essential for ELLs language development, they are often helpful for all students, as each content area has a domain language of its own. In addition to the individualized or departmental support that content area teachers receive from the ENL coordinator/teacher, they also have opportunities for professional development provided through the school or outside organizations in order to learn new instructional approaches and strategies that are beneficial to ELLs. The ENL coordinator/teacher researches these opportunities and frequently informs staff about them, advocating for their continued development. These opportunities often focus on making the Common Core Learning Standards accessible to ELLs. She also prioritizes her own professional development, through events and trainings as well as research and reading, so that she can keep abreast of current research and learn new methodologies that are relevant to educating ELLs. She has created and continues to add to an online ENL resource folder with links to current research, helpful websites, training videos, and more that is helpful to all teachers as they work to provide ELLs with the best education possible. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All ELLs have the right to be assessed in their native language. At Harbor School, the ENL coordinator is familiar with the needs of each of the students in terms of their testing preferences and needs. At the beginning of the year, the ENL coordinator meets with students individually to discuss their rights for testing, as well as their personal preferences and needs. The ENL teacher and testing coordinator (TBD) informs teachers of the necessary accommodations, and works with them over the course of the year to ensure that students are being tested fairly and appropriately. In addition, students always have access to bilingual resources during regular instruction. In order to prepare for State testing, teachers are encouraged and supported in using bilingual modifications and extra time for classroom testing. When necessary, the ENL coordinator helps teachers provide translations or alternative assessments, as well as extra time when students need it. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE At the time of this report, Harbor School has no Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) and has not had any SIFEs enrolled for the past two years. However, should a SIFE enroll in the school, we would provide that student with additional support time in an appropriate manner to bolster their academic skills as well as their language proficiency. Within classes, SIFEs would be paired with students who are confident, capable, and welcoming academic partners. b. Newcomers Newcomers receive the appropriate amount of ENL instruction based on their level according to CR Part 154-2. They receive targeted language instruction and content area support through direct ENL instruction and ELL resource room. The ENL 9  coordinator ensures that students learn and use a variety of text and online resources in their native language to bolster the content they learn in their classes. They are programmed for mainstream classes, unless they have additional instructional requirements such as an IEP or SIFE status. When a student first arrives at school, the ENL coordinator arranges for the student to be paired with an ELL ambassador, who helps the newcomer with adjusting to the school and social situations. Although ELLs are exempt from testing for one year after they first arrive, the school begins to prepare them in appropriate ways as soon as possible through content area classes and native langauge support for content area material. After the first year, students sit for the required exams and receive all ESL testing accomodations, including extended time, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, separate location, side-by-side exam translations, and the listening section read three times on the English Regents. c. 4-6 years ELLs receiving service from 4-6 years take the required number of ENL instructional minutes as per their proficiency levels and CR Part 154-2. Frequently, students at this stage of language acquisition need additional support for tasks at the higher end of their grade band. The ENL teacher/coordinator determines the appropriate scaffolds for each student and designs instructional plans that can be implemented in each of the student’s classes, making adjustments along the way as the student makes progress and new data is collected. d. LTELLs Long-term ELLs (LTELLs) take the required number of ENL instructional minutes as per their proficiency levels and CR Part 154-2. Students at this stage of language acquisition need additional support in reading and writing tasks at the higher end of their grade band. The ENL teacher/coordinator determines the appropriate scaffolds for each student and designs instructional plans that can be implemented in each of the student’s classes, making adjustments along the way as the student makes progress and new data is collected. The ENL coordinator/teacher also takes LTELLs’ specific social needs into consideration as well when planning instructional activities. As is the case at the Harbor School, the majority of LTELLs were born in or have resided in the United States for most of their lives. Sometimes, they do not identify themselves as English Language Learners because they grew up speaking both languages, and they may even take it as a stigma that they are labeled as such by the State and the school as such. In order to counteract these feelings of disassociation, the ENL coordinator/teacher emphasizes that students are learning Academic English, just as all high schoolers are, and incorporates role models, cultural events, and field trips that will build LTELLs’ engagement in the program. e. Former ELLs Former ELLs who have tested out of ENL within the past two years are provided with additional support from the ENL coordinator/teacher when appropriate, through individual conferences with students and teachers, extra help after or before school, and the use of native language online and textual resources. She frequently checks on the progress of the students in their mainstream classes, and implements any necessary interventions to support them. Additionally, the ENL coordinator ensures that all ELLs who tested out within the past two years continue to receive testing accommodations. The ENL coordintor analyzes test results from the previous two years and generates the list of ELLs who have tested out of ENL services but still receive mandated testing accomodations. This list is disseminated to adminsitration and the Testing Coordinating at the New York Harbor School. Former ELLs are now eligible for ELL testing accommodations and 90 minutes of English as a new language for up to 2 years after testing out 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL coordinator/teacher works closely with the IEP coordinator to determine the best program choices for students with special needs. Together, we implement individualized strategies that will meet each student’s unique needs. Most teachers at the Harbor School teach students who are classified both as ELLs and SWDs; therefore, the ENL and IEP coordinators work diligently with teachers throughout the year to ensure that these students are receiving rigorous, yet supportive, instruction. Harbor School believes that all students can access high-level material and content given the appropriate 0  supports, and therefore scaffolding is a huge part of our instructional model for all of our students, but especially our ELL-SWDs. Harbor School recognizes two fundamental concepts in relation to ELLs with disabilities. The first is that in general, ELLs are overrepresented in Special Education for a variety of reasons, including misdiagnosis. Second, in spite of their classification, each student has diverse learning needs. Teachers at Harbor School view each student as a unique individual before considering them as a part of a set subgroup. With this in mind, ELL-SWDs are not treated as one homogenous group with the same set of needs, but as a cohort of diverse individuals who each bring their own strengths and struggles to the classroom. The ENL coordinator and the IEP coordinator develop individualized learning for each student based on these two concepts. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The Harbor School believes that programs for ELL-SWDs should allow for maximum flexibility while providing students the the necessary support in the least restrictive environment. SWDs at Harbor School, including ELLs, are programmed into the program model (Co-Teaching, Self-Contained, SETSS) that will best meet their individual needs for learning content and bolstering English proficiency. Special Education teachers work extensively with content area teachers and the ENL instructor to ensure that students are being educated in the best environment and with the most effective strategies for each individual. In addition, all teachers are expected to take part in IEP meetings, and to be familiar with each students’ IEP goals. The ENL teacher in particular is highly involved in planning and writing IEPs for ELL-SWDs, as well as in ensuring that teachers are aware of and understand them. The ENL coordinator, IEP coordinator, and Special Education teachers reach out frequently to parents of ELL-SWDs in order to involve them in the education of their children. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs are targeted for intervention in their content area classes based on data collected through Grade 8 data, pre-assessments and interim assessments, classroom performance, and report cards. The ESL teacher works closely with content area teachers to improve classroom instruction for all ELLs, and supports Intermediate and Beginner ELLs content area classes through Resource Room. She also works with students after school or during lunches. Content area teachers also hold office hours regularly or by appointment, and ELLs are encouraged to attend. Most intervention services are offered in English, because the majority of our teachers speak English and not all of our ELLs speak the same language; however, we make sure to provide native language support through resources such as peer tutors, websites, text books, translations, and bilingual dictionaries. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our ELLs need more support in all of the content areas and espcecially in the Integrated Algebra, Living Enviornment, and Global History areas and this year we have opted for the Integrated ENL model with 2 individually certified teachers (co-teaching) model. We would like to increase our ELL population and so are increasing outreach efforts to middle schools with a large number of ELLs. We are planning to begin producing promotional materials about our school in more languages, including Spanish and Chinese, so that our efforts can better reach parents of ELLs in middle school, as well. 1  Another program being considered for next year is not new, but has not been part of our ENL program for several years. The ENL coordinator would like to start an ELL Explorers program for ELLs to encourage their exploration of and participation in the culture of New York City. We would also like to start a peer tutoring program that would serve all students, with targeted interventions for ELLs, in particular. Finally, the school would also like to build capacity in order to offer a Spanish class for native speakers that would be focused on literacy skills to promote students’ reading and writing abilities that will transfer to English proficiency and support them when they take standardized tests, as well. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Over the past several years, we have had to discontinue some programs due to our diminishing ELL population and lack of funding. We have had to cut back our city trips orientation program for newcomers, which exposed new students to New York City and taught them language and culture in the process. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are informed of and encouraged to join any and all school programs and clubs. Many participate in clubs and sports teams including soccer, sailing, fishing and swimming. This year, ELLs are encouraged to paticipate in the gardening and Composting internships. We ensure that ELLs have the opportunity to participate in conferences and college trips, as well. All students, including ELLs and SWDs, are supported in their participation in after-school activities, particularly through partnering with peer mentors who have had more experience in the club. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The school provides instructional materials to promote ELLs’ social, academic, and cultural development. We provide bilingual resources including: native language books in our library o)ur through our MyLibrary services), translations of texts, dictionaries, thesauri, and glossaries. We use the Words Their Way for English Language Learners instructional guide for improving reading and spelling. For Beginner ELLs, we use the Keys to Learning for Newcomer ELLs, which includes a technological component. Given our budget restraints, the ENL coordinator regularly researches helpful websites and apps that students can use free of charge, including Khan Academy, PHschool.org, and Brainscape.com. We also use an online grading system that allows students to closely follow their grades and progress over the course of the year. Parents also have access to the system. A major part of a Harbor School education is maritime studies. We say at the Harbor School that if you can build a boat, you can build anything. We sail, row, swim, build boats, scuba, grow fish and oysters, and all of this requires the use of vocabulary that most students, both ELLs and native English speakers, must learn. Therefore, the materials that we use to teach our particular classes are the materials of the Harobr. We are a hands-on school and students learn through participation. When needed, we provide additional support in the student’s native langauge, peer tutoring, small group or one-on-one teacher tutoring. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Harbor School recognizes that ELLs bring with them a wealth of experience and knowledge, including their native language. In our ENL program, we encourage students’ use of their native languages and incorporate their cultural heritages and backgrounds whenever possible. The ENL coordinator ensures that students always have the use of bilingual resources, including texts, dictionaries, websites, and apps. She also builds time in class for students to discuss their learning in their native languages with other students. Celebration is also an important part of showing students that their native langauges and cultures are valued and students are invited throughout the year to share with the class. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2  The Harbor School believes in amplification, not simplification, when it comes to supporting ELLs. Therefore, all required services and resources correspond with the students’ ages and grade levels. The ENL coordinator/teacher ensures that all materials are not only appropriate to students’ ages and grade levels, but also their interests and academic needs. When students need additional support, teachers work to provide alternative pathways to understanding, not simply “dumbing down” content or providing translations. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The school provides instructional materials to promote ELLs’ social, academic, and cultural development. We provide bilingual resources including: native language books in our library o)ur through our MyLibrary services), translations of texts, dictionaries, thesauri, and glossaries. We use the Words Their Way for English Language Learners instructional guide for improving reading and spelling. For Beginner ELLs, we use the Keys to Learning for Newcomer ELLs, which includes a technological component. Given our budget restraints, the ENL coordinator regularly researches helpful websites and apps that students can use free of charge, including Khan Academy, PHschool.org, and Brainscape.com. We also use an online grading system that allows students to closely follow their grades and progress over the course of the year. Parents also have access to the system. A major part of a Harbor School education is maritime studies. We say at the Harbor School that if you can build a boat, you can build anything. We sail, row, swim, build boats, scuba, grow fish and oysters, and all of this requires the use of vocabulary that most students, both ELLs and native English speakers, must learn. Therefore, the materials that we use to teach our particular classes are the materials of the Harobr. We are a hands-on school and students learn through participation. When needed, we provide additional support in the student’s native langauge, peer tutoring, small group or one-on-one teacher tutoring. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All freshman students participate in our Indock summer program and the maritime policy course, which introduces new students to our school and our island. ELLs are included in the Indock program. The maritime policy course introduces students to the different maritime studies that all students including ELLs can choose from after the completion of their freshman year. CTE programs include: aquaculture, marine biology research, marine systems technology, ocean engineering, professional diving and vessel operations. In addition to our CTE programs, ELLs are encouraged to participate in volunteer work including the Billion Oyster project led by the New York Harbor School. The ENL coordinator/teacher works closely with all ELLs over the course of the year. She follows their progress and works with them every day in multiple contexts: class, resource room, one-one conversations, and after-school help. She also arranges parent-teacher conferences when needed, or meetings between teachers and students. Newly-admitted ELLs receive this same attention at a more intensified level for their first year at Harbor School. The ENL coordinator/teacher also pairs new students with student ambassadors who can help them navigate the workings of the school, including social situations. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Harbor School is a Career and Technical Education school and therefore much of our educational program is focused on maritime studies, Science, and Math. At this time, we only offer Spanish I classes, which do not serve the language development needs of our ELLs (and other students) who already speak Spanish. However, all students are required to take a language course (unless they meet the exemption requirements), and so all of our students take Spanish at this point in time. In the future, we would like to develop a Spanish class for native speakers that would emphasize reading and writing at a higher proficiency level. 3  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This question is not applicable to our school. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional Development Plan for ELL Personnel The ENL coordinator (who is also the instructor of ENL) attends frequent professional development workshops and trainings throughout the year including an orientation and training session to the NYSELAT exam and the Implementation of New CR Part 154 to Ensure High Quality Education for English Language Learners hosted by the DOE. Each year, she uses student data and teacher feedback to create a plan to attend professional development offerings that will facilitate her own development as coordinator and instructor, will better her ability to assist content area teachers in their instruction of ELLs, and will build capacity for supporting ELLs in all areas of their social and academic development. The ENL coordinator also searches for opportunities that are appropriate and helpful for other teachers. She frequently shares opportunities (including workshops/trainings, webinars, text resoureces, websites, etc.) with the staff and encourages teachers to attend trainings that will further their development as teachers of ELLs. Additionally, the ENL coordinator plans in-house trainings and workshops throughout the year. She uses student data and teacher feedback to plan these trainings in order to meet the specific needs of the staff and students. Some of these trainings are mandatory for all staff, while others are made available on a voluntary level. The ESL coordinator also works with teachers on an individual basis to support the work they are doing in the classroom on a more targeted basis. 2. Professional Development to Support Teachers with CCLS for ELLs Teachers at the Harbor School are given the same training on the Common Core Learning Standards that is made available to all public schools across the city, including workshops offered by the DOE and in-house trainings given by the administration or other qualified staff members. In order to support teachers with CCLS for ELLs, the ESL coordinator meets individually and in small groups with teachers, provides mulitple and varied helpful resources related to the issue, and engages in peer-observation. 3. Support for Teachers of Transitioning ELLs (Middle to High School) Before the start of a new school year, the ENL coordinator meets with freshman teachers to review the list of incoming ELLs and discuss their strengths and needs. The ENL coordinator checks in with teachers frequently throughout the year to provide targeted support. Harbor School developed a program to support incoming freshman students called SAIL (Student Advisors Instilling Leadership), in which Senior students are trained to act as academic advisors for ninth graders. ELLs are included in this program and are ideally paired with a Senior student who speaks their home language and is a Former ELL. This program 4  supports freshman students with some of the major issues of the transition into high school. It supports teachers by providing students with time to learn about and deal with these issues in a safe setting. Teachers can also invite SAIL advisors into their classrooms to do specific presentations if the need arises. 4. Minimum 7.5 Hours of ESL PD for All Staff (10 for Special Ed.) The ENL coordinator plans and implements multiple professional development sessions over the course of the year to ensure that all teachers are equipped with strategies and methods for teaching ELLs, and also that they have an understanding of the langauge learning and acculturation process. She leads staff trainings, but also meets with individual teachers, departments, and grade teams to target specific issues concerning ELLs in the content areas. In all, the ESL coordinator provides over 7.5 hours of training to all staff (10 hours for Special Education teachers). We are building capacity within our school and professional development is also led by our own highly trained and experienced teaches in the Common Core Learning Stanard. The ENL coordinator and instructor is also a Lead Content trainer for the Office of Assessment and leads workshops on the Common Core standards and norming process for the English Comprehensive English Regents and the English Common Core Regents. We offer professional development in these subject areas in-house and during our departmental meetings. We also offer staff development in other subjects and encouarage teachers to attend professional development and turn-key what they learned and share with other staff members. In addition to staff development, we also have inter-visitation model and teachers visit each other's classrooms and reflect on best practices and how literacy is supported in the different grades. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We have a SAIL advisory team of older students helping younger students. The SAIL advisory team is comprised of seniors who are on the leadership team at the New York Harbor School. They meet once every two months with the freshman in their Maritime Policy course and help the freshmen with their transition period in a peer-to-peer and peer-to-mentoring program. We will build capacity within the school and offer professional development in-house to help support language acquisition, including a focus on best practicesfor co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The ENL coodinator and instructor keeps records of all professional development training received in a spreadsheet with a title of the workshop, hours spent, and focus in instruction on the Google shared drive. She then turn keys what she has learned with the other English teachers during the weekly departmental meetings in a train-the-trainer model. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the Harbor School we work as a team to meet the needs of the ELL population. The ENL coordinator is the point person and schedules an initial meeting with the ELL parent or guardian by December 2015. If a language other than Spanish is the preferred language, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for assistance. During the parent meeting the ENL coodinator meets with the parent or guardian and one other member of the cabinet will be in attendance: Principal, Vice-Principal, Dean, Parent Coordinator, and or Guidance Counsellor. Records will be kept of the meeting and the meeting will follow an established protocol. The ENL Coordinator will do her best to have the parent attend the meeting at the school but if the parent is unable to because of work or other obligations, we will try the second option of a telephone conversation meeting to discuss goals of the program and the language progress of his/her teenager. Again records will be kept and posted as an anecdote in Pupil Path. 5  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 1. ELL Parental Involvement Parents are involved at the Harbor School in a number of different ways. Over the course of the year, parents are invited to a number of trainings to learn about the school system, graduation requirements, and their child’s educataion. The school has an active PTA and parents also serve on the SLT. The school sends out frequent bulletins and newsletters, often in English and Spanish. ELL parents are included in all of the above mentioned activities, and the ENL coordinator also calls parents personally to invite them to school events, or to inform them of their child’s progress. Additionally, a number of workshops for ELL parents are held over the course of the year, namely workshops about the ESL program and supporting ELLs’ education. All essential communication home is in the parent’s home language. The school utilizes bilingual staff members (including the ENL coordinator) and/or DOE translation services to ensure that communication with parents happens in the language they know best. At the moment, the school does not have a parent coordinator on staff, but when one is hired, he or she will work closely with the ENL coordinator to promote ELL parental involvement through outreach and planning appropriate events and workshops. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jeffrey Chetirko, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) N/A Leslie Chow/ENL Coordinator Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: M551 School Name: The New York Harbor School Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Leslie Chow ENL Teacher Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the Urban Assembly New York Harbor School, we firmly believe that all parents/guardians should be provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. Determining language preferences for our parent community is a critical step towards fostering strong family-community ties and providing a supportive environment for all. The data and methodologies we use to access language preferences of the parent community are formal and informal. We will look at the ATS data. In addition, we have a calendar with key dates and mandates on our school’s Google drive and the LPT (Language Proficiency Team) and we work together as a team to help our ELLs succeed. However, the ENL Coordinator is in charge of certain responsibilities including the Home Language Identification Survey (HLQ) for new students entering the school from outside the city or a private school. When a new student enters the system, the LPT (personnel in charge of student programming and Parent Coordinator) checks to see if the student’s home or primary language is other than English and then we set up an individual interview with student and parents/guardians. If the student’s home language is other than English, the ENL 9  Coordinator makes a note of the home language that is preferred which is then logged into Pupil Path as an anecdote for all staff. The student is then screened for an initial ELL identification. During the individual interview, the ENL Coordinator makes notations if the student’s home language is other than English, After the NYSITELL assessment and if the student is determined an ELL, the student’s parent/guardian must receive within 5 days a written notice in their indicated preferred language including the Parents’ right to seek a Review of ELL Identification Determination, Information Regarding the Parent Orientation session, and ELLs English language proficiency level. These documents must be available in translation or interpretation in the parent/guardians in his/her preferred language so parents are informed about their child’s education. We believe that an informed and active parent/guardians, who supports and understands our ENL program, will be critical towards helping our ELLs succeed sooner than later. Once a student is placed in an appropriate ELL program within 10 days of enrollment, the parent/guardian must receive written notification of their child’s ELL Program Placement and the school will follow up with a phone call translation in the home language preferred and to answer parental questions. To date, Spanish is the only other language that has been requested for parent/guardians of our ELLs. We plan to build capacity from within and utilize the skills of our Language Proficiency Team (LPT). Jennifer Esposito is a member of our LPT Team and she is also a Bilingual Guidance Counselor. She is the first person on our team to provide translation services from Spanish to English and English to Spanish. In addition, we also have on the LPT Team: Jessica Cuevas, College and Career Counselor and a Spanish Interpreter, Alex Jones, a Social Studies Teacher and Spanish Interpreter, Hussain Fares (Math Teacher and Arabic Interpreter and Translator), and Leslie Chow (English and ENL Coordinator) with limited proficiency in Mandarin Chinese: written and spoken. Once the ELLs student’s home language is determined and if it is other than English, our staff personnel will log that information into ATS and include the home language preferences (Spanish, Mandarin, French for example) in the Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL), BESIS Student Information Service History (HIBE), and RHLA (Home Language Aggregation) using the ATS Codes. Non-ELL students' parents/guardian' preferred language are also very important to us and we gather all LEP information via the following forms which is then entered by our school staff in ATS: Student Registration Form, Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), Emergency Contact Cards, and parent-teacher conferences and or phone calls home. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish, Chinese English Bengali 135 28 820 5 13.45 2.79 81.67 .5 137 20 817 5 13.65 1.99 81.37 .5 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish 0  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Blue Emergency Card Parent Notification of ELL Identification Determination Entitlement Letter September September September Non-Entitlement Transitional Letter September Default Program Placement Letter (Letter not returned) Discipline Code School Year Calendar Respect for All Brochure September September September September After School Program Information September Parent Teacher Conference Announcements Testing Dates Absence or Lateness Notification Letters September September September Entitlement to Public Education or or Placement in Special Education September Learner or any non-standard academic program September Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services Translation Services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Teacher Conferences in October and February Translation Services Parent Survey and Selection Form September (for newly admitted ELLs) Translation Services Absentee and Lateness Notification Calls (parent/guardian outreach) in October, November, December and February, March, April, May Translation Services Orientation October and February Translation Services 1  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Call Translation services for support Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During the first few school day's teachers and staff will be provided with the chancellors regulation and the ENL Teacher will be there for support. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will utilize our school staff for Spanish and Arabic translators and interpretators . For all other language needs, we will first utilize the services offered at the T&I Unit website and request for free translation and intepretation services. For student specific needs, we will use the DOE vendor, The BigWord, Inc. During parent-teacher conferences, for example, we will have a Spanish interpretator for parents and teachers. If other languages are requested, we can utilize the T&I translation services and recommend the phone translation services. If we cannot accommodate the parent during the parent-teacher conference, we can set up an appointment for phone translation within a few days so information can be delievered timely and accurately regarding a student's progress and teacher recommendations. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent feedback is an important process of creating and maintaining strong family community ties. Our parent coordinator will help with parent surveys to continually monitor the needs and feedback from our parents/guardians. We will offer the survey in Spanish, Mandarin, Arabic, and French. In this survey, we will also ask parents/guardians for their preferred language of communication orally and written for school related documents. 2 
