 02M560 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL M560 - CITY AS SCHOOL Principal: ALAN CHENG   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: City-As-School 310200011560 10-12 16 Clarkson St. NY, NY 10014 212-337-6800 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 02M560 212-337-6875 Fax: Alan Cheng alan@cityas.org Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Alan Cheng John Antush SidselRobards Rachel Seher SidselRobards BrianaWilliams Scott Kessler Carolina Moquete District Information Geographical District: 02 Superintendent’s Office Address: Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 198 Forsyth Street, New York, New York 10002 protond@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 347-439-3023 Phone Number: 646-654-1261 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Room 606 Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alan Cheng John Antush SidselRobarts UssuriYu SidselRobards Brianna Williams Scott Kessler *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Carolina Moquete CBO Representative, if applicable CocavyahReid BrianaVigo KendyExime Member/ Student Member/ Student Member/ Student   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ethel Barrett ChiniquaBarnhill Marilyn Vigo DubencyExime Rachel Seher EM Eisen-Markowitz Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We believe that project-based learning in connection with performance-based assessment is central to preparing our students for college and careers. Inquiry is central to the academic experience at City-As-School, and all of our class and internship projects are designed to engage students in extensive inquiry and thinking through writing.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As an experiential learning school that is a member of the Consortium, our instructional focus for 2018-2019 is to deepen students’ academic inquiry and promote critical thinking through through the use of culturally-relevant pedagogy and practices in classes, internships and through our graduation portfolio (PBAT) process. We specifically intend to use high-leverage curricular and pedagogical strategies outlined by noted authors and practitioners within the field of culturally-responsive pedagogy such as Gloria Ladson-Billings, Sonia Nieto, Zarretta Hammond & Christopher Emdin. This instructional focus will extend across our academic program and be integrated into learning experiences within the school (classes) and in the field (internships) along with the written work and oral presentations for our graduation portfolios (PBATs). We identified this particular instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year through a collaborative process that involved looking at student work and examining our School Quality Review Feedback as part of our Spring Staff Retreat and in conversation with our current coaches and partners. We also know that this is a priority for our new Chancellor. Our 2017-18 instructional focus will build on our 2017-18 instructional work, which focused on engaging students in meaningful work and learning and, in turn, deepening academic rigor and cognitive engagement. As part of this, we examined student work for evidence of higher-order thinking and intellectual engagement and looked for places where it might be deepened. We then revised curricula and lesson plans with the goal of deepening academic rigor and cognitive engagement. In addition to regular observations with the school leadership in classrooms as well as at internship sites, faculty also observed each other teaching and then provided feedback through the lens of higher-order thinking and intellectual engagement. As a Consortium School with an experiential learning focus, we specifically looked at our graduation portfolio pieces (PBATs) and internship projects (LEAPs) through this lens and developed additional tools and strategies for ensuring that students were thinking at high levels and intellectually engaged. We specifically chose our 2017-18 instructional focus based on feedback from our 2016-2017 PPOs and School Quality Review in addition to summer principal workshops focused on cognitive engagement offered by Superintendent Kathy Pelles. In our PPOs and SQR, we were given feedback focused on deepening intellectual engagement in classes and, at the summer workshops, we were offered literature such as Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Learning that Lasts by Ron Berger along with videos on "Using One's Mind Well" from the Coalition of Essential Schools. Consistent with this, we chose to focus on supporting teachers in engaging students in deep and meaningful learning - both as a guide for making instructional choices and developing curricula - based on trends in our ADVANCE data from 2016-2017. This focus is also consistent with our belief, as a Consortium School, that students learn best and are more likely to engage in higher order thinking when involved in deeply meaningful learning tasks within an inquiry framework. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. City-As-School serves a population of transfer students who have spent at least two years in other schools. At full enrollment, we serve approximately 616 students who are between the ages of 17 and 21 and come to our school from all five boroughs. 20% of our students have IEPs. 3% of our students are classified as ENL. 43% of our students are over-age and under-credited, and 14% fall into the "most at risk" category. Our S-cohort has 278 student total. Of these, 156 have graduated, and 75 will return in 2018-19. Our students often have had spotty attendance records and negative experiences with school and come to us needing extra social and emotional support and a very different experience than the ones that have previously not set them up to be successful in high school. Our school provides our students with an abundance of choice and personalization in coursework and internship opportunities because our students are older than entering students at regular high schools and need to be engaged by addressing and respecting their own interests. We offer classes that follow more 0  of a college schedule along with internship days where students report to off site work places precisely because they were not engaged in a traditional high school setting. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We feel that we have made great gains in each of the areas of the Framework, but the greatest growth have been in the area of Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership. Both of these were critical in helping build a strong culture of mutual respect and growth in our practice and our work together in support of our students. For this coming year, we would like to continue to work on those two areas as we feel they are crucial elements to improving student achievement. We would also like to improve on our Family and Community Ties by establishing stronger community partnerships and engaging with family members more extensively than ever before. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M560 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 627 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 6 4 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 152 67 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 63.0% % Attendance Rate 60.6% % Reduced Lunch 3.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 42.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 13.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 80% 36% 31.3% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES YES YES No N/A 45 39 44.2% 1.6% 19.9% 37.3% 4.6% 2.4% 6 7% 7.5 N/A N/A 57% 24% 57.0% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Both external reviewers in Principal Performance Observations and School Quality Reviews as well as NYC School Survey identify Rigorous Instruction as a strength for our school. We received a Well Developed in all three Instructional Core indicators - Instruction (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), and Assessment (2.2) - for our School Quality Reviews in 2016-17 and 2017-18. Our most recent Framework score for Rigorous Instruction was 4.79. This data reflects our efforts over the past past five years to ensure that all of our students are engaging in deep, meaningful, and rigorous learning across experiences. This has been reinforced through individual conferences with teachers, classroom observations, whole faculty meetings, teaching team and department meetings, visitations to fellow Consortium schools, and the graduation portfolio presentation process. The data above show the efficacy of our efforts. A specific area of focus for us within Rigorous Instruction is Pedagogy (1.2). This indicator was identify as our area of focus in our 2017-18 SQR. In addition to this data, we conducted our own inquiry as a faculty within the school in 2017-18. This has involved examining student work during faculty meeting time and conducting focus groups with students. Based on our own internal analysis, we have identified culturally-relevant pedagogy and practices as a specific area of growth for us pedagogically. As such, this coming year, we will focus explicitly on culturally-relevant pedagogy and practices as a vehicle for deepening student learning. This will be our instructional focus. We will work on this during our weekly Friday morning faculty meeting time and in team and department meetings. Our professional development committee will meet over the summer to plan to introduce this to our faculty upon return in September and to engage our faculty in further developing our PD plan. The school leadership will reinforce this focus through individual work with teaches starting with our individual goal setting meetings at the start of the year. We have created a framework representing key aspects of culturally-relevant pedagogy that faculty will use to conduct a self-assessment. Based on this, each faculty member will identify an individual goal in this area. 3  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have utilized the principles of culturally-relevant pedagogy in their curriculum and lesson planning as well as in their pedagogical practices. This will be measured through our end-of-year Structured Reviews with individual teachers and captured in the artifacts examined. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Draft an Instructional Focus statement and Professional Development plan reflective of the relevant data from 2017-18 and drawing on the research within the field of culturally-relevant pedagogy by Gloria Ladson-Billings, Sonia Nieto, Zarretta Hammond & Christopher Emdin July - Aug Professional Development Committee Principal & AP Instruction, Teacher Leaders, UFT Chapter Leader Share the Instructional Focus statement and Professional Development plan developed by the school leadership in July with the PD committee, collaboratively refine them to build investment, and plan to introduce them to the faculty. Introduce the Instructional Focus statement and Professional Development plan to the faculty upon return in September and engage faculty in further developing and refining the plan. Whole Faculty Sept Principal & AP Instruction Read an analyze a short text by Gloria Ladson-Billings to develop a shared understanding of culturally-relevant pedagogy during whole faculty PD on September 4. Introduce a culturally-relevant pedagogy self-assessment framework and ask faculty to complete it before their Individual Planning Conferences. Integrate individual goal setting in the area of culturally-relevant pedagogy into to IPCs for all faculty. Form interdisciplinary faculty study groups that meet every three weeks in faculty meetings to examine student work through the lens culturally-relevant pedagogy and practices. Use this to refine curricula and project instructions for classes and internships with the goal of deepening student learning by using culturally-relevant pedagogy and practices. Professional Development Committee Whole Faculty Every three weeks, Principal & AP Instruction Sept-June Professional Development Committee 5 Also, examine graduation portfolio pieces (PBATs) and internship projects in team meetings. Examine them the lens culturally-relevant pedagogy and practices. Use this to refine departmental curricula and project instructions with the goal of deepening student learning by using culturally-relevant pedagogy and practices. Faculty Members Share new curricula and best practices in a mid-year whole faculty share. Whole Faculty January Principal & AP Instruction Reflect on individual growth using artifacts during individual mid-year check-ins. Use this to measure progress related to SMART goal. Professional Development Committee Faculty Members Share additional new curricula and best practices in an end-of-year whole faculty share. Whole Faculty Sept - June Principal & AP Instruction Reflect on individual growth using artifacts during individual Structured Reviews. Use this to measure success related to SMART goal. Professional Development Committee Faculty Members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be kept involved in and informed of expectations and due dates through our "Look at the Week Ahead" weekly newsletter, advisors who regularly communicate with families and through access to Jumprope, for which we provide training. Families will also be updated as to student progress at parent teacher conferences. Progress and initiatives will be shared at SLT and at PTA meetings monthly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  The principal and AP instruction will lead this work. We are allocating per session funds to create and support a PD committee that will lead the work in this domain and take responsibility for achieving this goal. The committee will consist of a lead teacher in each subject area, our UFT chapter leader, and at least two members of the leadership. We will continue to work with Cecelia Traugh, the Dean of Bank Street's Graduate School of Education, to plan our professional development time and support our teacher leaders. If our budget allows, we will engage Border Crossers to our whole faculty work in the area of culturally-relevant pedagogy on Chancellors days. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October 2018, 100% of teachers will have set an individual goal regarding the implementation of culturally-relevant pedagogy and practices during Individual Planning Conferences. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will have reflected on their progress towards this goal using relevant instructional artifacts in an individual mid-year check-in. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have implemented culturally-relevant pedagogy and practices as evidenced in instructional artifacts examined in end-of-year individual Structured Reviews. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Evidence will be collected in individual Initial Planning Conferences, mid-year check-ins, and end-of-year Structured Reviews. Relevant instructional artifacts will be examined. This will be captured in written notes from all three meetings for each individual teachers. Progress will be tracked in our yearly Teacher Tracker which is an Excel spreadsheet. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In our most recent School Quality Reviews (2015-16 and 2017-18), we received a Well Developed rating on indicators 1.4 (Learning Environment) and 3.4 (School Culture). Both reviewers noted a strong sense of community at the school and said that students felt safe and respected in the building. Indicator 3.4 (School Culture) was our Area of Celebration in our most recent SQR with the reviewer citing our ability to build in inclusive community in which all students were supported in high academic achievement. We have used our graduation rate data to identify our area of focus within the Supportive Environment Element. In 2017-18, 59% of our alternative cohort met the NYS requirements for counting towards our alternative cohort graduation rate by June 2018. We are aiming for 70% for the 2018-19 year; the state goal is 67%. We track the progress of our NYCDOE 6-year cohort, which is the data source provided by the city, and have will provide additional supports for our 6-year cohort students this year. Our 2018-19 6-year cohort (S-cohort) has 278 students. 156 have graduated. 75 will return to our school in 2018-19. 30 of these 75 must graduate for us to reach a 67% graduation rate from this cohort. We will put in place additional systems and interventions to support our remaining S-cohort students in graduating by June 2019. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our remaining 6-year cohort (S-cohort) students will have received all of the following interventions to support them in graduation: - regular attendance calls from a member of our support staff - at least 2 "progress and planning" meetings with the student, their advisor, guidance link, college advisor, parent (if applicable) and a member of the school leadership. - at least one outreach call, text or email per week from the students' advisor or guidance link. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Analyze S-cohort data and create an Excel spreadsheet for tracking progress using data from ATS. Identify the remaining S-cohort students and their credit and PBAT needs Develop an intervention plan for this group of students to share with the staff upon returning in September. Share this plan with the advisory department chair, guidance representative, parent coordinator, and peer collaborative teacher focused on attendance, and refine to build investment and develop a plan to introduce to staff on September 4. Introduce the plan to support our 6-year cohort to the faculty upon return in September and engage faculty in further developing and refining the plan. S-Cohort Students Sept Make initial outreach calls to our remaining 75 S-cohort students and call until we reach someone at home on September 4 and 5. Begin daily attendance calls on September 6. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? July - August Principal Advisors & Guidance Counsellors S-Cohort Students Assistant Principals Advisory Department Chair Guidance Department Representative Parent Coordinator Peer Collaborative Teacher Principal, Assistant Principals, Advisory Department Chair, Guidance Department Representative, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Support Staff  Form an attendance team for the 6th-year cohort students comprised of a member of the school leadership, our advisory department chair, a guidance representative, a support staff representative, and our peer collaborative teacher. Hold intervention meetings with each of these students during the month of September. Continue daily attendance calls. Meet weekly as an attendance team to monitor attendance for our remaining 75 S-cohort students. Update our S-cohort data at key points in the year (October, December, February, April and early June); each of these is at the start of or before the end of a cycle (which represents an opportunity to graduate). S-Cohort Students Sept - June Support staff Attendance team Advisors Sept - June Attendance team and guidance links Re-examine our S-Cohort list and refine our intervention plans. S-Cohort Students Send home bi-weekly mailings with key dates and deadlines throughout Cycle 4 (April, May, June). S-Cohort Students Mid-April - June Make extensive outreach calls to remaining S-cohort students and their families at the start of Cycle 4, and hold a graduation planning lunch for them. Target S-Cohort students for after-school tutoring and Saturday School. Update S-Cohort list and plan for summer school in June, if necessary. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Support staff Advisors Guidance links Attendance team Support staff Advisors Guidance links 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be kept informed of opportunities, expectations and due dates through our "Look at the Week Ahead" newsletter, mailings home, advisors regularly communicate with families and families all have access to Jumprope. Families will also be updated as to student progress at parent teacher conferences. Data on school progress toward goals will be reported and analyzed at SLT and at PTA meetings monthly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our Principal and one of our Assistant Principals will lead this effort. We allocated a Peer Collaborative Teacher line to attendance outreach focused on the 6-year cohort. We are hiring a parent coordinator who used to be a teacher at the school to be part of our attendance team. Our advisory department chair and guidance department representative will also be involved in leading this effort. Time will be allocated in our whole faculty meetings, advisory department meetings, and guidance department meetings to examining our S-Cohort list and refining our intervention plans. Advisors, guidance, support staff, and the school leadership will be involved in regular outreach and intervention meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will track the following interventions for our S-cohort students and review our progress weekly to ensure that by, June 2019, 100% of our remaining 6-year cohort (S-cohort) students will have received all of the following interventions to support them in graduation: - regular attendance calls from a member of our support staff - at least 2 "progress and planning" meetings with the student, their advisor, guidance link, college advisor, parent (if applicable) and a member of the school leadership. - at least one outreach call, text or email per week from the students' advisor or guidance link. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1  Progress to graduation tracker that was created in Excel drawing on data from ATS as well as additional in-house data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In our 2015-2016 and 2017-18 School Quality Reviews, we received a Well Developed on indicator 4.2 Teacher teams and leadership development. As one reviewer observed, “the vast majority of teachers are engaged in inquiry-based, structured professional collaborations. Distributed leadership structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership.” This is an area where we have challenged ourselves over the past three years. We have increased both the frequency and the quality of our teaching team meetings, and we have created a Professional Development committee comprised of teacher leaders who facilitate both teacher team meetings and Friday morning faculty meetings. We also started a distributive leadership initiative with the support of the PROSE panel. Over the past two years, spent time and money training teacher leaders and administration in the practice of Descriptive Inquiry, in collaboration with faculty from Bank Street College, which is a teacher team and faculty meeting activity. Many of our staff members have had the opportunities to participate in Descriptive Inquiry. We will be continuing this work in order to strengthen in and give all staff members a chance to take part in and ownership of this process. Teachers at our school have a long history and appreciation of working collaboratively, but there is still some areas for improvement in the upcoming school year. In the 2017-18 school survey, our overall score was 4.54 which fell in the Exceeds category. The two areas of relative improvement for us are Innovation and Collective Responsibility (89% positive) and Quality of Professional Development (89% positive). While our rating in both of these categories exceed the city average, we would like to bring both to at least 94% positive. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our percent positive for "Innovation and Collective Responsibility" and "Quality of Professional Development" will be at least 94% (survey results from the NYC DOE school survey to be given in 2019). 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Use results of examining data in faculty study groups and our spring faculty retreat to create our 2018-19 Instructional Focus Statement and Professional Development plan. Subject-area teams, Aug - Sept School leadership and team facilitators Expand our Professional Development Committee to include additional staff members and provide additional opportunities for facilitation training and responsibility as a way to expand and deepen investment. Advisor department, RC department, Special Ed department Share the Instructional Focus statement and Professional Development plan developed by the school leadership in July with the expanded Professional Development committee, collaboratively refine them to build investment, and plan to introduce them to the faculty. Introduce the Instructional Focus statement and Professional Development plan to the faculty upon return in September and engage faculty in further developing and refining the plan. Whole faculty Devote a Consultative Committee meeting to examining the 2018-19 Instructional Focus Statement and Professional Development Plan and refining based on faculty input to further build investment and consensus. Pair current teacher leaders with new volunteers to co-facilitate weekly teaching teams and Friday morning faculty study groups as an additional way of involving more faculty members and building investment. Sept Principal & AP Instruction Professional Development Committee Sept UFT Chapter Leader Sept 4  Offer a facilitation training for faculty members who would like to take on additional facilitation responsibilities during the 2018-19 school year. Hold weekly PD committee meeting that involve these stakeholders to support weekly team meeting and faculty meeting facilitation. Hold weekly coaching session with team facilitation pairs. Administer an internal surveys to monitor progress in January. Whole faculty Augment this with bi-monthly faculty focus groups to gather input and build investment. Reflect on progress and gather input from faculty about school priorities for 2018-19 by analyzing data at our spring faculty retreat. Sept Weekly: Sept - June Weekly: Sept - June January Sept - June June Principal & AP Instruction Professional Development Committee Whole Faculty 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be kept involved in expectations, school initiatives, and due dates through our "Look at the Week Ahead" newsletter, advisors regularly communicate with families and families all have access to Jumprope. School survey results will be shared with and analyzed at SLT and shared at PTA meetings monthly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our teaching team facilitators and our APs will be supporting a bulk of this work. Additional per session funds will be made available for facilitators to meet and plan after school. Additional faculty will be invited to participate, and funding will be made available for additional facilitation trainings. The 2017-2018 faculty schedule has also been constructed so that the whole faculty will meet on Friday mornings from 9 until 10:30. Members of subject-area teams will have common planning time. Both the principal and AP Instruction will make collaborating with faculty to support and facilitate the PD committee (and, in turn, PD) a priority. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, an internal school survey will reveal a 2% increase in percentage of staff members responding positively to the two prompts in a year to year comparison. By June 2019, the percent positive for both indicators will be 94%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC DOE School Survey Results taken in the Spring 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our score for Effective School Leadership was 4.45 in the 2018-19 NYC School Survey, which exceeded the city average (+98). Our percent positive for Inclusive Leadership was 93%, for Instructional Leadership was 94%, and for Teacher Influence was 95%. We also received Well Developed on indicators 1.3, 3.1, and 5.1 on our 2015-16 and 2017-18 School Quality Reviews. According to the 2017-18 School Survey, one area of growth is Program Coherence. The percent positive for this indicator as a whole was 77%. For one specific question - "teachers say that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working" - our percent positive was 63%. Ensuring that faculty can see that we follow up to make sure that new programs are working and are involved in the process will be an area of focus for us in 2018-19. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of positive responses on Program Coherence will increase to 85% positive and for the question "teachers say that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working" will increase to 80% positive. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School goals (our 5 CEP goals) will be formulated by the school leadership as SMART goals and then reviewed with the SLT and cabinet. Adjustments will be made and action plans will be developed based on their input in order to build investment. Our 5 CEP goals will be divided among SLT and cabinet members who will take responsibility for helping to implement specific programs, monitor our progress and make this visible to faculty. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers July - Aug Principal & Assistant Principals Parents Students SLT Cabinet SLT and Cabinet Members will introduce the school goals to faculty on September 4 and 5. Faculty will divide into five groups to review the goals and action plans and give input. Whole Faculty Sept Principal & Assistant Principals The school goals and related action plans will also be reviewed and refined in a consultative committee meeting to further build investment, consensus, and understanding. SLT Cabinet SLT and Cabinet Members will monitor our progress on our school goals at SLT and Cabinet meetings. SLT & Cabinet Sept Principal & Assistant Principals These individuals will report back to the whole faculty on our progress any refinements to the action plan during school-wide announcements at one faculty meeting per month. Whole Faculty SLT SLT and Cabinet Members will assess progress using an internal school survey in January 2019 and report back to the faculty. Whole Faculty The results of the 2019 NYC School Survey and other data sources will be analyzed and also shared with the faculty in connection with our school goals. Jan June Cabinet Principal & Assistant Principals SLT Cabinet 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be kept involved in expectations and due dates through our "Look at the Week Ahead" newsletter, advisors regularly communicate with families and families all have access to Jumprope. School survey results are referenced and shared with the SLT and at PTA meetings monthly. The Principal & Assistant Principal have been invited to participate in PTA meetings to regularly update parents on the progress towards school goals and school-wide initiatives. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Cabinet will meet weekly. SLT will meet monthly and will be coordinated by an Assistant Principal. Our school goals will be visibly displayed throughout the school, and an Assistant Principal will track our progress towards our goals in an Excel Spreadsheet to make this visible to faculty. The 2017-2018 faculty schedule has been constructed so that the whole faculty will meet on Friday mornings from 9 until 10:30. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, an internal school survey will reveal a 3% increase in percentage of staff members responding positively to the same prompt in a year to year comparison. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be assessed using the NYC DOE School Survey Results revealed in June 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In a June 2018 survey administered by our Parent Association with the support of our Parent Coordinator, parents and guardians have told us that it is very difficult for them to volunteer any time to help out the school given their current work and family obligations, but we hope that create more opportunities for parents and guardians to be involved in their children's education. We hope to be able to help them see that their active participation is a great way for them to contribute and support their children. When we think about Strong Family & Community Ties more holistically, we turned to the Quality Review indicators 1.3 Resource Allocation and 1.4 Learning Environment. Each of those indicators speak in part to the ability of schools to establish a positive relationship with families and community members as well as our ability to allocate resources to support our students. On both of these indicators we were rated Well Developed on our 2013-14 QR (they were not rated on the 2015-16 QR). The reviewer highlighted our outreach efforts to parents and the feedback from parents about the positive impact the school has made on their children. The goal we set below deals with the Strong Family & Community Ties indicator on the 2017-18 NYC School Survey. We are specifically focusing on the sub-indicator "Parent Involvement in School" and within that two questions: 72% "of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school" and 72% "of families say that they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests, or quizzes." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of families will "say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school" and 80% of "families say that they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests, or quizzes." 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). New parent coordinator will meet with Parent Association Presidents and Parent Association to generate ideas for giving parents additional opportunities to volunteer at the school and see their children's project work. Monthly mailings as well as emails will be sent inviting parents to volunteer at school-wide events (Back-to-School BBQ, Monthly Concerts, Thanksgiving Feast, Talent Show, Learning Conference, June BBQ) and to participate in portfolio (PBAT) presentations (November, January, April, June) as well as our annual Learning Conference (called Experience-the-Experience) in June. An Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator will explicitly include volunteer opportunities and opportunities to examine project work in the weekly "Look at the Week Ahead." Our Parent Coordinator will coordinate a "shadow your child in school" day in the fall and in the spring, so that parents can join their children in their classes or at internships. Student work will be displayed and integrated into parent-teacher conferences. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator Sept PA Presidents Parent Association Principal & Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator All parents Monthly: Sept - June Weekly: Sept - June December & April Sept 26, Nov 29, March 7, May 15 2 The parent coordinator will support the parent association in administering an internal parent engagement survey to parents in September, January and June. The results will be analyzed by the parent coordinator, the PA presidents, the PA and the school leadership and outreach and opportunities for parents will be revised accordingly so as to maximize parent involvement. All parents Sept Parent Coordinator Jan PA Presidents June Parent Association Examine responses to internal parent survey from June and the 2018-19 School Survey and adjust our efforts for next year. PA Presidents June Principal & Assistant Principal Parent Association Parent Coordinator PA Presidents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Families will be kept involved in expectations and due dates through our "Look at the Week Ahead" newsletter, advisors regularly communicate with families and families all have access to Jumprope. Families will also be updated as to student progress at parent teacher conferences. School progress toward goals will be reported and analyzed at SLT and at PTA meetings monthly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Most of this work will be integrated into the existing roles and responsibilities of the parent coordinator and school leadership. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the middle of the year, January 2019, we hope to have increased parent responses by 3% on the two focus indicators via an internal survey. 3  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The focus indicators will be examined on the 2018-19 NYC School Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are in their 4th, or 5th year but have not passed the ELAregents exam. Mathematics Science Students who are in their 5th or 6thyear and have not yet presented their math PBATS. Students who are in their 5th or 6thyear and have not yet presented their sciencePBATS. Social Studies Students who are in their 5th or 6thyear and have not yet Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Our use of Performance Based Assessments and projects in place of the Regents Exams helps many of our students who have otherwise struggled with standardized tests. Our use of Performance Based Assessments and projects in place of the Regents Exams helps many of our students who have otherwise struggled with standardized tests. Our use of Performance Based Assessments and projects in place of the Regents Exams helps many of our students who have otherwise struggled with standardized tests. Our use of Performance Based Assessments and projects in place of the Regents Exams When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before, during and after school as well as Saturday sessions. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Double block classes for assisting students still in need of taking and passing the ELA Regents. Small group instruction and one-to-one tutoring We provide small group and one-to-one tutoring Before, during and after school as well as Saturday sessions. We provide small group and one-to-one tutoring Before, during and after school as well as Saturday sessions. We provide small group and one-to-one tutoring Before, during and after school as well as Saturday sessions. 5 Small group and one-on one contact During and after school. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) presented their social studies PBATS. Our guidance team (social workers, school psychologists, and guidance counselors) meets regularly to build a list of at-risk students to focus on each quarter. helps many of our students who have otherwise struggled with standardized tests. One-on-one contact is made available for the student throughout the day and after school. All of our counselors, social workers and school psychologists have been incorporated into each seminar. Small group instruction has also been implemented into the regular school schedule. We’ve also partnered with a CBO to provide additional college and career counseling during school. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  Additional guidance support services via social workers and guidance counselors as well as additional school supplies. We have a team of 7 guidance counsellors / social workers. Each student is linked with a faculty advisor and a guidance link. The guidance links, in particular, work with STH students to ensure that they have the supplies and other services they need to progress academically. As a school, we have the following on hand for STH students: school clothing, internship clothing, personal hygiene products, school supplies, books, and packaged food to take home. In addition to counselling provided in the school, we also connect students with counselling and additional programs through the DOOR, which is near our school, and we connect students who are 18 and over with housing shelters if needed. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $29,061 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We begin recruitment each winter through the Consortium and other progressive school networks of which we are a part. We onboard new staff in August through a week-long new staff orientation. All new staff members are provided with a mentor. We have a professional development committee that works with the school leadership to plan weekly professional development for all staff. Additionally, all teachers participate in weekly teaching team meetings. The school leadership coaches team facilitators. External professional development is also encouraged and is provided through the Consortium for Performance-Based Assessment, Bank Street College of Education, the Institute on Descriptive Inquiry, and NYU's Facilitative Leadership series. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All of our courses are CCSS aligned. Course materials are examined and refined in light of the CCSS in team meetings and faculty meetings in which all staff participate. Principals participate in this as well in addition to district level workshops that are CCSS focused. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 9  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 1  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD TBD Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Parental Involvement and School Quality Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 3 TBD TBD TBD II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name City-As-School HS Borough Manhattan School Number 560 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alan Cheng Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ian LeBlanc Teacher/Subject Area Rhea Ummi Modeste Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Maribel Sanchez Superintendent Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Assistant Principal Joselyn Peña-Phillips Coach School Counselor Maribel Sanchez Parent Erika Taveras Parent Coordinator Devonne Heyward Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 624 5 Total number of ELLs 17 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.72%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Upon enrollment, students' previously earned LAB-R and NYSESLAT scores, and results in intake assessments are reviewed and assessed to help inform ENL students' early literacy skills and program needs. The LAB-R will also be administered upon intake if their Home Language Survey indicates that their home language is a language other than English. Looking at most of ENLs' scores, historically majority fall into the long-term category and so where they need more support is in academic language (CALP) as opposed to BICS. Due to the low percentage of ENLs school-wide, this has not affected the school's overall instructional plan. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have weekly English Department meetings and our ELL identification work is embedded in those department agendas, especially at the beginning of each school year. 6  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Along with reviewing the data that is available to us when students transfer into our school and comparing the results of previous NYSESLAT exams (if there are prior exams available) with the current year's NYSESLAT results, the ENL teacher collaborates closely with the ENL students' teachers to get a sense of how he/she seems to be developing. There are at minimum monthly check-ins and before the beginning of every 1 of the 4 school terms, the ENL teacher works with the administration to develop the plan for the upcoming term to best support the ENL students. Class assessments, written work, quarterly passing and credit accumulation rates in classes and internships, PBAT passing rates and ELA passing rates are all utilized to evaluate the success of our programs for ENLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have weekly English Department meetings and our ELL intervention work is embedded in those department agendas, especially at the beginning of each school year. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As a transfer school with students coming and spending varied amount of times with us, from 6 months - 2 years, a view of the data shows that patterns are very inconsistent. While many of our ENL students have achieved a high proficiency rate in the NYSESLAT taken previous to their enrollment at our school, there is often inconsistent and varied patterns, depending on the currently enrolled students. The NYSESLAT data does show a more consistent deficiency in the areas of reading and writing. Therefore, it is necessary that our instructional planning and focus promote activities that are active and engaging for all students, and are based on promoting reading comprehension and writing skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have weekly English Department meetings and adjustments and refinements to our ELL work is embedded in those department agendas, especially at the beginning of each school year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As the ELL population has grown over the past few years, we have added an integrated model to our stand alone model. In the newly added integrated model, the ENL teacher, Ian LeBlanc is providing support to ENL students in the ELA classes giving students the opportunities to take these classes along with their peers, while receiving support from the ENL teacher, in group instruction. In the stand alone model, each of the identified ENL students are scheduled for 180 minutes of stand alone individualized pull-out model with the Mr. LeBlanc. Students are grouped in un-graded classes and as a heterogeneous group, aligned to our whole-school model. b. TBE program. If applicable. 7  N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The mandated number of instructional minutes is determined by the results of students' last LAB-R/NYSESLAT scores on record. Those students who place at the Beginner/Entering level and students who place at the Low Intermediate/Emerging level are scheduled for 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Students who place at the Intermediate/Transitioning level are scheduled for 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. Students who place at the Advanced/Expanding and Proficient/Commanding levels are scheduled for 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher, Ian LeBlanc, focuses on pronunciation, vocabulary development, active listening and oral communication. Students participate in a variety of oral activities as a way to develop their communication skills in English, including but not limited to introductions, making suggestions, asking and giving directions, comparing and contrasting stories, and repetition of sounds and phrases. Through her collaboration with ENL students' content area teachers, Ms. Kamani works with content area teachers in skills and techniques that can assist the students with their second language development in these classes by modeling, coaching, scaffolding, problem-solving, flexible grouping, and practice. Through her individual work with the ELL students and feedback received from content area teachers, the ESL teacher assists the students in areas of struggle particular to the content area work. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ENL teacher, Ian LeBlanc, coordinates evaluation of ENLs in their native language. If he cannot perform the evaluation himself because he is not proficient in the identified home language, he will solicit the help of other pedagogues in the school who can speak the native language to perform the evaluation. If a school staff member is unavailable for a specific language, outside resources will be used. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Developing and long term ENL students are required to take stand-alone ENL for 180 minutes weekly and 180 minutes of integrated ENL weekly. They also receive additional support in internship experiences. Both stand-alone and integrated ENL options are available to former ENLs up to 2 years after exiting ENL status, if they and their parents wish for them to continue receiving this support. As a transfer school, we have never had a SIFE level student apply to City-As-School and we have never encountered new comers or students who have not completed a minimum of 2 years at another high school. The identified ENL students are supported in heterogeneous groups. 8  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? By reviewing SWD students' IEPs in SESIS, and in co-planning with the Special Education teachers, the ENL teacher, develops targeted strategies and grade-level materials to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English Language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In consultation and in co-planning with the ENL teacher, IEP goals are reviewed and plans are put in place. Flexible programming is provided by the school-wide student choice programming model. Using the newly adapted integrated ENL model allows for SWD students to attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The program of study is aligned with New York State's ENL and Common Core ELA curriculum and reflects the state's learning standards through instructional practices and proper use of acceptable learning materials such as texts. Our ENL students also enjoy student centered learning approaches, the ability to complete many class requirements using a research based "presentation" method. This allows them to collaborate and produce a presentation or project that reflects the material being learned in each academic class. When necessary and available, the use of native language is utilized to further support students through readings, writings, and spoken language, if there is someone available who speaks the native language as well. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are currently exploring expanding the push-in model to other content core classes, including Humanities, Science and Mathematics. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All support and instructional program available for ELL students and Special Needs students are available for students identified as both ELL and Special Needs. Within this program, parents, guidance counselors, related service providers, the ENL teacher and Special Education teachers collaboratively work toward providing the identified students with the instruction and educational support necessary to be successful within the ENL and Common Core curriculum. Some strategies include intervention services, one-to-one tutoring, counseling and collaborations among all content teachers. ELL students are full incorporated and invited to participate in all school wide activities and are always integrated into all curricular and extracurricular activities. ENL students are programmed into an advisory as all students are, and are delivered the same information as are the rest of the students in the school- through advisory, mailings, and emails. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Newly developed curriculum aligned with the Common Core Standards have been selected from the SED. The use of on-line programs have also been selected to support ENLs. Instructional materials used to support ELLs includes textbooks, novels, non-fiction reading materials, newspapers, electronic versions of readings of all genres and in native languages are made available to ENL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Books and dictionaries are maintained at the school and made available to the ELL students for continued reading/translation between the native language and English 9  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We provided targeted support for Portfolio projects and ELA Regents are our students are at the 12th grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Newly developed curriculum aligned with the Common Core Standards have been selected from the SED. The use of on-line programs have also been selected to support ENLs. Instructional materials used to support ELLs includes textbooks, novels, non-fiction reading materials, newspapers, electronic versions of readings of all genres and in native languages are made available to ENL students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New ELL students are fully incorporated into the daily activities of the school and are provided with additional social-emotional support for full incorporation into the program. Their intentional pairing with the ENL teacher as their advisor with the support of the school Social Worker, Amy Greco, provides ENL students with additional support to minimize their frustrations as new students in a new school and to overcome some commonly identified barriers of ENL students. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Through internship opportunities, ELLs are afforded the opportunities to intern at organizations that provide opportunities/exposure in the Native Language such as non-for-profit community organizations that provide support to immigrants from China, immigrants from Cuba, etc. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher has the opportunity to attend outside PDs selected by her and also offerings that are made available via DOE, and other outside agencies. On the last Friday of each month, the ENL teacher will disseminate newly learned information and practices to best support ENL students in school-wide regularly scheduled Professional Development sessions to all staff, inclusive of teachers, guidance team members, and support staff. Workshops led by Ms. Kamani will also be offered throughout the school year for small groups of teachers to join with specific topics to support ENL students in content area classes. The ENL teacher, Rita Kamani has the opportunity to attend outside PDs selected by her and also offerings that are made available via DOE, and other outside agencies, including the Consortium of school we presently belong to. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 0  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. N/A We focus some of our yearly professional development for all staff on best-practiced ELL strategies and methodologies. The PD is provided via in-house conferences and outside opportunities available for the ENL teacher. The minimum 7.5 hours of ENL training for all staff is provided through these conferences. Aside from scheduled PD, the ENL teacher will make herself available to meet with other teachers regarding best practices Cross-curricula and by organizing workshops that are led by her. AP, Joselyn Peña-Phillips, will maintain the record of all PDs offered internally, and all PDs attended to outside. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During New Student Parent Orientation, the parents of ENLs are informed of the overall goals of the program. The parents of ENLs are then contacted by the ENL teacher to further discuss students' language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. If staff are available to translate in parents' native language, we ask them to provide translation services. If we do not have a staff to accommodate the native language, we utilize the services of the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ENLs are regularly contacted by the ENL teacher, who also serves the role of the advisor. Through these communications, the parents are invited to attend Parents' Association meetings by the parent coordinator, Maria Bermudez, and events scheduled and open to parents such as Expos, Holiday Feasts, etc. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. : 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alan Cheng, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: City-As-School HS School DBN: 02M560 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alan Cheng Title Principal Joselyn Peña-Phillips Assistant Principal Devonne Heyward Parent Coordinator Ian LeBlanc ENL/Bilingual Teacher Erika Taverez Parent James Carroll Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Maribel Sanchez School Counselor Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Jocelyn Santana Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M560 School Name: City-As-School HS Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Judy Sachez Paraprofessional Y Y * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon intake, students receive a questionnaire from the Parent Coordinator requesting parents’ preferred language of communication. Thereafter, all communication with parents is in their language of preference. When surveys are not returned, review of student previous records are conducted to identify parents' native language. For those parents whom we have been unable to communicate with in English, parents are contacted with the help of in-staff translators or with the help of the Office of Translation and Interpretation unit within DOE. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Chinese Arabic Haitian Creole Bengali Burmese Finnish Russian Korean Balante French Mandinka Nahuatol Polish Amoy GA 566 145 6 5 3 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 76.49 19.59 0.81 0.68 0.41 0.27 0.27 0.27 0.27 0.27 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0 0 565 145 3 5 3 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 76.35 19.59 0.41 0.68 0.41 0.27 0.27 0.27 0.27 0.27 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.14 0.27 0.14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 5  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Monthly newsletters (which include quarterly calendars, information about upcoming PTA meetings and conferences and school events) Each month translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our newsletters are sent out by mail and by email. Joselyn Pena-Phillips, one of our assistant principals translates the documents into Spanish so that all of our mailings will include both Spanish and English. For the other languages (each of whom are less than 1% of the population), we use Google Translate to convert the text and email new text those to the parents. 6  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Teacher Conferences As per DOE calendar plan to provide interpretation service(s)? In each of our teacher offices, we have teachers, social workers, parent coordinators and paraeducators who are able to translate into Spanish. When necessary, the translation services of school staff or the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit are utilized. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school utilizes the Remind app/platform for emergency announcements. The app has a built in translate feature that allows students and parents to translate the text into a language that they can understand. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 7  We distribute and review the materials as part of our annual welcome back all staff meeting in September. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Upon intake, students receive a questionnaire from the Parent Coordinator requesting parents’ preferred language of communication. In this packet, we also include information about their right to receive information in their preferred language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Through parent survey, and regular verbal communication between parents and school staff, we will be able to regularly gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. The Parent Coordinator will also create a survey with the Parents' Association to specifically address the needs of our parents in our school. 8 
