 05M670 School Name: THURGOOD MARSHALL ACADEMY FOR LEARNING AND SOCIAL CHANGE Principal: MAJOR FAREED   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Thurgood Marshall Academy for Learning and Social Change 310500011670 6-12 200-214 West 135 th Street 212-283-8055 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 05M670 212-690-2918 Fax: PrincilaAmoakoa pamoakoa@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Major Fareed Angela Young Teri Ghee Email Address: Parents’ Association President: Angela Young/Nia Modeste SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Eric Hall SanaaDonalds David Magazine N/A Geographical District: 05 District Information DanikaRux Superintendent: 123 MorningsideDrive Unit 2 Room 235 New York, New York 10027 Superintendent’s Office Address:   drux@schools.nyc.gov 1-212-222-1395 Superintendent’s Email Address: 1-212-316-0451 Phone Number: Brooklyn FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 1-718-935-5618 Phone Number: 1-718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Major Fareed Angela Young Teri Ghee Marie Easton Eric Hall SanaaDonalds David Magazine Tanya Hamer Hope Scott JamellahCadell *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Regina Fowler TamilaSpooner-James Nia Modeste Candice Hatfield Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Thurgood Marshall Academy (TMA), is an academically rigorous environment where college and career readiness drive instruction and practices. Every student will embrace their global responsibility, have a vision for their future, a plan for realizing that vision, and the knowledge, skills, and experiences for setting it in motion. At TMA, we believe that students learn best when provided with opportunities to work cooperatively, allowed time to probe, and are   given space to digest and analyze the material. We define rigor as cognitively demanding, daily learning experiences in which students are required to push themselves and their peers to actualize their greatest potential 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Rigorous instruction involves tasks that are thought provoking. In an academically rigorous environment, the learner is expected to explore, identify patterns, consider varying viewpoints, make connections, evaluate outcomes, speculate, problem solve, create, think critically, reflect and develop a deep understanding of concepts that can be applied in the real world. We believe that for our students to meet the requirements of the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), successfully transition to demands of the NYS Next Generation Standards and to continue progress toward rigorous learning and adequate performance, our instructional core must encompass the following components: • interdisciplinary and cross curriculum tasks, skills, strategies, and academic vocabulary • organizational and study skills • student-centered class experiences • clearly defined expectations, guidelines, and rubrics • time for practice, reflection and self-assessment • rigorous tasks (that range in complexity, sophistication and type) • multiple modes of assessment and learning checks • multiple access points and varied opportunities to demonstrate an understanding • student choice • opportunities for small group instruction • individualized intervention plans The conditions mentioned above define “TMA’s Essential Elements of Instruction.” This shared understanding of effective teaching developed over time. We begin everything with the CCLS and utilize the Charlotte Danielson Framework to guide our planning and preparation decisions. Subject teams work to develop CCLS- aligned curriculum maps that incorporate UDL and allow for multiple access points. We also utilize the Danielson Framework and CCLS Shifts in Literacy and Mathematics. As a school, we are better able to address the needs of our students through on-going reflections on our practices, data checks, and professional development. One of TMA’s greatest strengths is that we address the needs of the “whole child.” TMA’s culture concentrates on ensuring that students and families vested members of the school community. We have cultivated true partnerships with our families and have become a second home to students, families, and staff. We are a “full service” institution. TMA’s doors are open 6-7 days a week, from 7 am and as late as 9 pm. We willingly open our state of the art space to community organizations that work with us to provide services to our children. Our open-door policy allows families structured access to the school and staff every day. TMA has cultivated strong partnerships with organizations that 0  support us in developing the whole child. Our staff has devoted much of their time, establishing in-house organizations that provide supports to our children, emotionally and academically. The following are just a few of the many partnerships and programs:  The Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) program is a research-based program that supports our work in helping to ensure that all grade 6 students graduate middle school on or above grade level. MSQI is based on recommendations for the Carnegie Reading Next Report, which combines research and well-crafted strategies to improve adolescent literacy. (1.3) MSQI is founded on Five Core Pillars: Reading Screening and Monitoring, Literacy Across the Content Area, Strategic Reading, Teacher Teams, Professional Development. Because the MSQI program encompasses research-based best practices, we are capitalizing on MSQI resources by implementing much of that same work in grades 7-9. (1.3) This work includes: Word Generation a research-based vocabulary program that is designed to teach weekly academic vocabulary words across disciplines, Strategic Reading periods- Grades 7 and 8 students engage in independent reading time 3-4 times weekly in one of the major core subjects or during after school, Intervention structures for struggling readers  Our Expanded Learning Time (ELT) program has been revamped to align better to support student  achievement and to fill in learning gaps, based on data from the daytime classroom. Daytime teachers also instruct smaller groups during ELT. Street Squash- a comprehensive youth enrichment program that combines academic tutoring, squash instruction, community service, college preparation, leadership development, and mentoring for public school students. Squash students spend summers completing  Young Eisner Scholars- (YES), works with us to identify highly capable/intellectually promising students from under-served communities and provides them with tutoring in language skills development and leadership training. Students participate in Saturday Academy at Columbia University and a summer institute at the top boarding schools in and outside of the U.S.  The Broadway Juniors Program - The Shubert Foundation has partnered with the Department of Education to provide students with authentic learning experiences in the arts. The Broadway Juniors Program members are working with TMA staff to support students in exhibiting higher self-esteem, build collaborative and social skills and develop better cognitive skills through the arts.  The Harlem Educational Activities Fund (HEAF) assist students that have demonstrated a commitment to learning and to support those students in developing intellectual and social skills, prepare for college and provide students with on-going support during and after college.  Brotherhood/Sister Sol- A Harlem-based, comprehensive and holistic youth development organization that provides long-term support services to youth who range in age from six to twenty-two. The Brotherhood/Sister Sol focuses on issues such as leadership development and educational achievement, bias reduction, sexual responsibility, sexism and misogyny, political education and social justice, Pan-African and Latino history, and global awareness.  Expanded Success Initiative- ESI is a key part of New York City’s Young Men’s Initiative and is a partnership with the Department of Education, and The Fund for Public Schools (FPS). ESI sets a higher bar for the long-term educational outcomes of New York’s Black and Latino male students, namely by ensuring they graduate from high school prepared for success in college or a career pathway.  Brothers on a New Direction- BOND provides personal and academic support to male students. The BOND program has three components: academic intervention, social-emotional intervention and enrichment activities such as field trips, retreats, literacy circles and community service initiatives. The unique elements of BOND are that the BOND mentors are all men of color, BOND alumni return to participate in mentorship programs and celebrations. One key component of BOND is that the mentors are educators that work at TMA. Because the mentors have a relationship and rapport with colleagues, this allows for immediate academic and behavior interventions. BOND mentors are consistently available to parents, daily on weekends and during holidays.  Thurgood Marshall has partnered with Columbia Presbyterian to offer a full-service clinic that includes medical providers (physician assistant, psychologist, social worker, health educators, as well as dentists and hygienists. The School-based health Center offers a broad range of services; vision and hearing tests, immunizations, complete physical exams, chronic disease management (i.e.: asthma, diabetes), minor and 1  major illnesses, lab work, mental health services, health education and dental referrals. Our students take full advantage of our clinic, as evidenced by the 60-75 weekly visits logged by the clinic.  Mentoring in Medicine - Engages students in grades 9 -12 through mentorship and high school credited science coursework to develop intellectually, leadership skills and civic engagement to pursue a career in the health care and science field.  Tech Row - a Harlem-based seeking to close the technological gap of access, understanding, and shifting students from the users to makers of technological tools; with a particular focus of students in the Harlem community. Through this partnership, TechRow and TMA will create a technology pipeline for students to be able to skills, understandings and approaches to the use and development of tech tools, including but not limited to Virtual Reality, coding and Design Theory approaches with a goal linking prepared students to internships with viable tech companies looking to diversify their workforce and ultimately support students to pursue careers in the tech field. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school's recent data indicates that 17% of students at 05M670 have Individualized Education Plans to support their learning. This population of students have demonstrated the slowest academic improvement as shown in performance data on the grades 6 - 8 NYSED ELA and Math examinations, Regents pass performance and type of diploma earned. There is an instructional gap that the school will address through revising curricular choices, adopting research-based pedagogies grounded in literacy to support students in making improvements in gap areas, revisiting the intervention support structures are all grades, ensuring supportive guidance counselor intervention to support with HS graduation planning that includes linkages with families and looking to build on culturally relevant practices that meet students where they are to push them to where they will need to be in order to prepared for college or career post high school. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Collaborative teaching was an area that the school made a significant improvement, particularly in the area of providing quality professional development. Areas of Key Focus: Rigorous Instruction: 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 05M670 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 547 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 2 5 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 9 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 69.8% % Reduced Lunch 3.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 25.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.33 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 87% 64% 81.2% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 146 147 3 92.1% 3.8% 19.2% 69.7% 1.8% 1.5% 4 40% 9.3 21.2% N/A 78% 77% 93.7% 21% N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At 05M670, students demonstrate increases in performance at and/or proficiency on NYSED ELA and Math exams in grades 6 – 8 as they matriculate from grade to grade. For example, in 2018, 42.11% of grade 8 students performed at or above proficiency on the 2018 ELA grade 8 exam. That same group as seventh graders, 26.4% of the students performed at and/or above proficiency on the 2017 NYSED grade 7 ELA exam; this was an increase of 15.71%. Similarly, 05M670 has seen steady increases in Regent performance for the ELA (79% 2018 exam) and Global History (59% 2018 exam) Regent examinations. Much of the performance increases were due to restructuring of the Professional Learning cycles, a focused goal of improving writing instruction and partnership support with outside organizations (Middle School Quality Initiative, AP for All). A deeper review of the 2018 student performance data demonstrates a greater need to build on the work from last year, with a focus on: 1. Forwarding the Community School District 5 Instructional Priority on developing genre writing that mirrors the criteria, structure and level of thinking sophistication of the CCSS aligned assessments. Our focus will be on building improved instruction on proficiently responding to constructed and extended response items that mirror the NYSED exams (grades 6 – 8 and Regents) 2. Ensuring the classroom tasks, activities, projects and other forms of assessment are aligned to the NYSED interpretation and application of the CCSS test items from NYSED assessments. 3. Building on appropriate pedagogical approaches to support students improving performance outcomes on the revised tasks, activities and assessments that we develop. There are several data points that lead 05M670 to identifying this instructional gap as an area to further correct during the 2018 – 19 school year: In grades 6 – 8: the total number of students that performed at performance level 1 in both the grades 6 – 8 NYSED 2018 ELA and Math test were greater than the number of students that performed at approaching proficiency (Level 2). Only grade 8 ELA was there an opposite effect. Student June 2018 Regent performance was at 0% for the Chemistry Regent, 32% for the Living Environment Regent, 0% for the Geometry Regent. Part 2 – Annual Goal 4  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 05M670 will demonstrate increases in the following NYSED assessment: Grades 6 – 8 2019 ELA Exam: Increase in student performance at overall proficiency from 31% (2018) to 42%. Grades 6 – 8 2019 Math Exam: Increase in student performance at or above overall proficiency (performance levels 3 and 4) from 23% (2018) to 35%. 05M670 will see a minimum of 15% increase in student performance on the following Regents administered in June 2019: Algebra 1, Living Environment, Physical Settings/ Chemistry, Geometry. 05M670 will see a minimum of 8% increase in students passing at 65% or more on the following Regents in June 2019: ELA, Global History, US History and Government. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 05M670 will start the year with a School-wide data dive of all NYSED assessments to better understand how the assessments are constructed, criteria/rubrics are applied and how NYSED aligns CCSS to test items. This will launch a year-long focus on revising classroom tasks, activities, assessments across all content areas. The school will launch focused content area learning cycles on research based pedagogical practices that are most appropriate for students at our school (cycles will include the use of protocols for looking at student work, lesson study and action research of pedagogical approaches (i.e. an action research cycle focused on the benefits of using a closed reading process to improve student inferring comprehension). Teacher teams will work in configurations of content and grade levels. RTI structures – middle school: literacy intervention through the use of “Just Words”, book clubs, direct reading comprehension supports – tutoring opportunities built into the day for mathematics using number talks, math routines to develop student numeracy, pm school tutoring opportunities, Saturday program, Extended Learning Time targeted interventions1 Utilize partnerships with network and NYCDOE Initiatives for outside and in-school coaching and professional learning opportunities that align to the school’s instructional focus. All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students in grades 6-12 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, Instructional teams, department teams, grade teams and the data team. Students Designated for RTI Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Guidance Counselors, school programmer, Special Education Team, Classroom Teachers, SoBro Administrators, CBOs, New Visions, Affinity Network, CSD 5, NYCDOE Initiatives (MSQI, AP for ALL, College for ALL, Algebra for All).  Grade teams will utilize their allotted time for parent engagement to reach out to parents about their child's progress and to update their online grading tools to provide parents with accurate academic information. Methods of communication will include IO online grading application, REMIND text message application, backpack letters, phone calls (individual and phone blasts) The school will conduct curriculum nights for families in September, November, and February. During these non-parent Teacher Conference sessions, families will have opportunities to learn about how to best support their children in being successful at school, learn about support resources families can access and have opportunities to talk with the school team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding to support DataCation, instructional and grade team meeting and funds for our school wide messenger service. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The high school mid-point benchmarks will take place in January 2019 and in April 2019. Based on the January 2019 review of data, adjustments will be made in both curriculum and intervention supports that will include: Saturday Program for Content Area Support in specific Regents, after school tutoring opportunities and linkages to online intervention applications for specific content areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The high school will use mock Regents exams as a tool, as well as teacher generated exams that use test items from Regents and CCSS aligned test items. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Through a responsive structure of restorative practices including mediation, adopting de-escalation practices by teachers and team members, linkage opportunities for in-school mental health counseling, drug and alcohol addiction therapists, college and career guidance and partnerships with a multiple CBOs, 05M670 has been able to create safe spaces for students and adults to engage in the work of school. As evidenced by a sample of student survey responses from the 2018 School Quality Guide: 85% of middle school students say that their school provides guidance for the application process for high school. (Q9a) 86% of high school students say that adults at their school encourage them to continue their education after high school. (Q10b) 72% of students say that most students try hard to get good grades. (Q6i) 05M670 determined, based on a variety of data sources that included the 2018 School Quality Guide survey responses, the school will focus its efforts to create greater opportunities for students to take on leadership and ownership of what happens in the school as well as an investment in improving student experiences in daily classroom instruction. Responses that informed our area of focus for Supportive Environment included: Peer Support for Academic Work: 62% of students say that most students feel it is important to come to school every day. (Q6f) 72% of students say that most students try hard to get good grades. (Q6i) Personal Attention and Support: 60% of students say that their teachers support them when they are upset. (Q3e) 8  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the 05M670 will see an increase in student responses to the following School Quality Guide questions: Q6f, Q6i and Q3e by a minimum of 10%. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school will greater integrate the members of the student council in decision-making of student activities, school policy and school-wide initiatives. The school will additionally build out greater opportunities for students to participate in choice afterschool activities ranging from sports, art, performance and technology for the high school level. All Students October 3,, 2018-June 13, 2019 Administrators, COSA, Student Activities Director, Student Council, students, Teachers The school will conduct 4 parent engagement workshops on common core standards, the school-wide curriculum, and the college process. These workshops will provide parents with the information they may need to support their child during the academic year. Students Sept. 17, 2018-June 13, 2019 School Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, CBOs Additionally, the school will embark on a series of college tour visits, college fairs and direct contact with career organizations to support students in deciding on post-high school decisions. The school's after school coordinator will continue to foster relationships with our partner organizations: Young Eisner Scholars, Harlem Education Activities Fund, Brotherhood/Sister Sol and Street Squash to ensure the communication takes place to support student learning. The school will provide targeted professional development for teachers to better prepare them for meeting the needs of at-risk learners. This includes the use of restorative circles and culturally responsive pedagogical strategies/approaches. Teachers Sept. 6, 2018-June 13, 2019 Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Parent Teacher Association, Administrators, Special Education Department, Teachers n/a n/a n/a N/A 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will conduct curriculum nights for families in September, November, and February. The assistant principals and the parent coordinator will be responsible for leading this effort. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parents will have the opportunity to use laptops during the workshops that will be offered by the teaching staff. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School will administer in-house survey to students at least 3 times during the school year. The survey will use questions directly from the School Quality Guide Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC School Quality Guide Survey questions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In our most recent Quality Review, the school received a Well Developed in QR Indicator 4.1 (Support and evaluation of teachers through the Danielson Framework and analysis of learning outcomes) and in QR Indicator 4.2, (Teacher teams and leadership development). Additionally, based on the School Quality Guide from 2017 – 18, teacher survey results in the area of Collaborative Teachers were: Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction 3.83 out of 5 Peer Collaboration 3.70 out of 5 Quality of Professional Development 4.14 out of 5 School Commitment 3.60 out of 5 05M670 recognized the need to increase, in meaningful ways, teacher input and leadership in contributing to the school’s performance beyond classroom instruction. This was borne out an analysis of the individual survey results from the 2017-18 School Quality Guide. Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction 83% of students say that their teachers use examples of different cultures, backgrounds, and families in their lessons to make learning more meaningful. (Q1f) Innovation and Collective Responsibility: 76% of teachers say that teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching. (Q1b) 70% of teachers say that teachers take responsibility for improving the school. (Q1c) 76%of teachers say that teachers are eager to try new ideas. (Q1d) 05M670 will Revisit the teaming model to create focused inquiry cycles grounded in areas of need as demonstrated by student performance data and directed by teacher leadership. The primary drivers of the team work will be through grade level and content areas teams. The school will collapse teams that engaged in redundant work streams to craft more purposeful work focus through the reduced teams. These teams will include an Instructional Leadership Team, Programming Committee, School Culture team our CRE Team. 2  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 05M670 will see the following increases in teacher and student responses to the NYC School Survey questions: Student Responses: Q1f: from 83% (2018) to 87% (2019) Teachers Responses: Q1b: from 76% (2018) to 85% (2019) Q1c: from 70% (2018) to 80% (2019) Q1d: from 76% (2018) to 82% (2019) 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Restructuring of teams based on focused workstreams. Each team will have direct support from an administrator and links to outside network and/or consultants on a consistent basis. Each team will integrate the practices of the research text, “Meeting Wise,” to organize the structure and management of teams. Each team will ground decisions in student performance data that is either generated from the teams or through a different data source. Teachers will have an opportunity to join teams. Teachers will be informed of the work of teams through a variety of means of communication. Teachers will also have opportunities to contribute to the work of teams even if they are not part of those teams. Teams will facilitate professional Learning opportunities that will support teachers in the work of revising tasks, activities and other assessments to align to how NYSED aligns and assesses tasks and activities as demonstrated by NYSED assessments (grades 6 – 8 ELA and Math assessments and Regents examinations) Teams will focus their work around these areas from exploring and supporting the development of sound and appropriate pedagogical strategies, deepening teacher content understanding and utilizing research of proven instructional structures for middle and high school grade levels. The supports will be targeted to support all students at 05M670. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Staff Sept 24, 2018-June 13, 2019 Administration/ Instructional team leaders/ Teacher Teams/ New Visions, Affinity Network. Teachers Sept. 13, 2018-June 13, 2019 Administration Grade Team Leaders, Teachers, Special Education Coordinator, Instructional Team Student Council and other student leadership will provide feedback of their experiences and support in shaping school initiatives of how to better improve classroom instruction and their school experience. Students, Teachers, Families Sept. 13, 2018-June 23, 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team, Grade Teams, Student Council n/a n/a n/a n/a 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will conduct curriculum nights for families in September, November, and February. The assistant principals and the parent coordinator will be responsible for leading this effort. The activities will include reviewing state standards and school-wide goals, how teachers plan lessons to help students achieve their learning targets. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The participation of teachers and student leaders will utilize in an effort to achieve this goal. Student leaders will lead parents in sessions about the school day and as well as explain the courses that are offered at the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 05M670 will utilize 3 benchmark survey check points where samples of student responses and teacher responses will be tracked based on the questions identified in the goal. Based on the results of the first 3 checkpoints, teams will review the data and act based on the improvement or lack thereof that will have been demonstrated. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Selected survey questions from the NYC School Survey. In-house measures as constructed by teams to progress monitor (in the form of baseline assessments used prior the start of a learning cycle against an end of cycle assessment, etc.) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a review of the School Quality Guided, the school’s most recent QR and internal data from surveys and feedback, teachers and parents expressed high regard for the school leadership. For example, in the areas of Instructional Leadership (School Quality Guide), the school earned 4.25 out of 5. The change in principal offers an opportunity to build on the results from the 2017 – 18 school year, while also reflecting and revising structures to better organize the school for increased student success at all levels. Two areas that the school will invest in heavily will be in Program Coherence and Instructional Leadership. 05M670 Program Coherence: 84% of teachers say that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working. (Q8e) Instructional Leadership: 84% of teachers say that the principal knows what’s going on in their classroom. (Q11g) 84% of teachers say that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers. (Q11h) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers responses to question Q8e will increase from 84% to 90% by June 2019. Teacher responses to questions Q11g and Q11h will increase from 84% to 90% by June 2019. 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? AP Teachers Sept. 2018– June 2019 Administrators, Instructional Team, Teacher Teams Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To address program coherence, the school will focus on developing cycles of study through professional development that will have clear beginning and ends that focus on impactful work that will improve student outcomes. One structure that the school will implement will be the use of common assessments. The school will administer at least three common assessments during the school year. The school will review and analyze the performance data at each common assessment check point and tailor instruction to address the gaps and strengths identified. This will be the core structure of the school’s progress monitoring system. This will result in improved student performance results as identified in the goals for Rigorous Instruction through the use of at least 3 common assessment check points in ELA and Math for grades 6 – 8 and in specific Regents bearing courses for grades 9 - 12 of the school’s progress monitoring system. 1 Embedded in the Observation and Feedback Structure in the school, the administrators will engage in both non-evaluative and peer class visits with feedback sessions as a way to open classrooms both within and across content areas. All teachers Sept. 8, 2018-June 10, 2019 Administrators and Instructional Team Grade Team Leaders By June 2019, the school will offer an increase of AP Regent offerings and Early College courses for all grades 9-12 students by the 2019 – 2020 school year. By Instituting a revised Program Committee, the school will ensure that every grade 9 – 2 student will have a graduation plan, that all teachers will have access and contribute to supporting the students through. These plans will inform program offerings for the next semester. Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrators, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Instructional Team 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will provide feedback through the use of surveys and in-school feedback sharing session with administrators on the impact of the efforts to better improve instructional conditions for students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session compensation, research materials, laptops and other media. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 05M670 will administer at least 3 benchmark surveys that will the targeted questions from the goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Quality Guide Survey selected questions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017 – 18 School Quality Guide, the overall index performance of 05M670 in the category of Strong Family-Community Ties was 3.51 out of a total 5. This speaks to the variety of efforts that we employ to connect with families via a variety of mediums. The general response by families that we support is that interactions with personnel from 05M670 is open, understanding and purposeful. One area that we identified a need to improve upon in the 2018 – 19 school year is in creating greater opportunities for more families to contribute to the school. The following survey results informed our determination: 60% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a) 81% of families say that they have communicated with their child’s teacher about their child’s performance (Q4b) 80% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. (Q6a) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, the 05M670 will create an additional 4 opportunities for families to connect and support the school community that will result in an increase of families interacting with the school across all grades, enroll families to support the school in areas identified by various constituents of the school (teachers, students, families, etc.) and directly address Q4a, Q4b and Q6a. 05M670 will see an increase to 70% for Q4a, an increase to 87% to question Q4b and an increase to 85% for Q6a. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research indicates that parent participation is vital for student success in school. The school will continue to implement curriculum nights, town hall meetings and open houses throughout out the school year. All Staff, students, and parents. Sept. 2018-May 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administrators, Teachers, Guidance Counselors, School Aides In coordination with the SLT and Parent Teacher Association, 05M670 will plan, coordinate and facilitate the additional Family oriented connection events. This will include opportunities for families to directly meet with the principal at monthly chats during the school day. Parents and students Sept. 2018, June 2019 SLT, PTA, Administrators 05M670 will employ the services of partnering community-based organizations to create greater opportunities for families to contribute and connect with the school. Parents, CBOs Sept. 2018-June 2019 CBOs, school liaisons 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Abyssinian Development Corporation, Street Squash, and SoBro. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA Funding, Parent Coordinator, PTA Executive Team. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 0  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 05M670 will have held an additional 2 family events as evidenced through sign-in sheets and family feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets and surveys will be utilized to assess progress. The School will administer an internal survey at least 2 times during the school year during family events that will include the following questions from the NYC School Survey: Q4a, Q4b and Q6a. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who scored a level 2 and below on the New York State ELAexam in the Spring and a Level 2 or below on the Degrees of Reading Power will be identified for Academic Intervention Services. Students who scored a level 1 or 2 on the New York State Math common core exam and who did not perform well in the CMP3 Math unit readiness assessments Teacher generated assessments and New York Performance Task assessments will be recommended for support in Science. Teacher generated assessments and New York Performance Task assessments will be recommended for Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) What I Need (WIN) periods scheduled in the middle school Teacher created materials When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After school, lunch periods, and Independent reading periods Khan Academy online program Laptop computers and IPads. After school, lunch periods, study skill periods and WIN periods. Expanded Learning Time program Teacher created materials After school Expanded Learning Time program Teacher created materials After school 2  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) support in Social Studies. The Guidance team targets students based on marking period grades and credit accumulation (semesters). Harvard Education Associates and Expanded Learning Time. Bookclubs and teacher created material After school, lunch periods 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have eight students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will be provided with the necessary essentials and support needed to be successful academically, This can range from school uniforms, classroom supplies, tutoring, academic intervention, and health and wellness services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school focuses on recruiting and retaining teachers by focusing on student learning. We recruit teachers using the New Teacher Finder, Cornerstone (New Visions for Public School ), and the New York City Teaching Fellows and the Open Market. The school has a hiring committee which includes administrators and teachers. All prospective teachers perform a demonstration lesson before any decisions are made. New teachers are supported with a mentor and the school supports them with the help of the Office of Teacher Development. New teachers also have monthly meetings with the principal and the administration to discuss their work or to address any concerns. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school has a year-long professional development plan, and the administration provides weekly professional development on Mondays and some Tuesdays of each week. The school conducts a survey of teacher needs and coordinates that with noticings from teacher observations and feedback from the Principal's Performance Observations. The principal and the assistant principals attend monthly professional development with the superintendent. All professional development learning focuses on supporting students with the common core and the Chancellor's Framework for Great Schools. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 6  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All teachers participate in the developing of their unit plans and developing their unit assessments. The administration team works with the teachers to select baseline assessments and an assessment calendar. The assessments are graded within the department and the data is used to inform next steps for instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 312,500 n/a 7 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x n/a Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5c, 5D n/a  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local n/a n/a 3,327,651 n/a n/a x n/a n/a Section 5 Part A, B, C 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 8  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Thurgood Marshall Academy for Learning and Social Change, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Thurgood Marshall Academy for Learning and Social Change will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ●fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ●providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 0  ●sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ●providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 1  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Thurgood Marshall Academy for Learning and Social Change , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 3  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 4  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 5  ● always try my best to learn. 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 05 School Name Thurgood Marshall Academy Borough Manhattan School Number 670 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mr. Sean Davenport Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mr. Papa Tall Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Katherine McDowell Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Yolanda Tomlin/SS Related-Service Provider Ms. Evelyn Gleason Superintendent Ms. Danika Rux Assistant Principal Mrs. Marcella Carr-Gay Coach School Counselor Mrs. Tamelia James Parent Ms. Tonia Byrd-Lee Parent Coordinator Ms. Princila Amoakoa Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Mary Norwood Other (Name and Title) Mrs.Gena Fludd, Pupil Accounting Secretary C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 580 7 Total number of ELLs 24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.14%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 3 2 4 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Thurgood Marshall Academy uses a variety of tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. We use data from tools such as the NYSITELL, Spanish LAB, teacher designed formative and/or summative assessment, and running records. From this data, we noticed that about 50% of the ELLs, have low literacy and phonetic skills; about 15%, have challenges with pronunciation and comprehension; and about 28% needed to work on phonetic skills. The data is shared with core subject teachers of the ELL students and it is used for common planning with these teachers, especially the ELA teachers. Periodic benchmark exams are administered to determine student reading levels, areas in need of improvement and progress. We also use teacher generated formative and summative assessments as well as state standard assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 8 Students attend small group instruction where reading instruction and targeted strategies are worked on every week. These strategies are then taught in a whole group classroom setting. This data provides a lot of insight into ELL data because it informs how quickly and how much each student progresses in reading. The students are also assessed on their writing, listening and speaking ability in the classroom and this is done during individual conferencing with students and logged into their journals. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The school uses HLA Assessment, NYSITELL and Spanish LAB (if applicable) as baseline assessments. These assessments will yield information used to determine ELL students' level of English Language (Entering, Emerging, Expanding, Commanding), and, to determine entitlement to ELL services. Teacher-generated summative assessments and the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) to identify progress and areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? a) Student results as analyzed by the ESL teacher suggest that most of our ELLs are doing well in areas that involve listening, speaking and calculation skills. This pattern is consistent across proficiency and grade levels. b) Our school leaders and teachers are using the results of the ELL assessments to design cycles of intervention for improvement; which also include the identification of the areas of strength and growth, and assessment and evaluation of the effective of the intervention. c) Interventions include targeted instruction in reading and writing in order for ELL students to make gains in content areas that require extensive reading and writing. Thus, we are focusing on improving the critical reading and thoughtful writing skills of our ELLs. d) Teachers have been programmed for common planning time across Grade and Department levels which allows teachers to discuss, compare and plan necessary interventions for ELL students. Since they are teaching similar students, teachers can discuss student progress and determine which instructional strategies are more effective than others. e) During summer, we examine how our students performed on the NYSESLAT exam and compare it to other New York State tests such as English Language Arts, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies to see areas that we need to focus on for the following year. We also evaluate the instructional tools we have in the classroom and see if additional materials need to be purchased to enhance instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The school uses outcome data from the HLA, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Grades 6-8 ELA and Math NYS Exams and all content area Regents Exams for students in grades 9-12 to evaluate and inform ELL programs. The students' overall scores are noted and compared to those of their Native English Speaking peers in order to determine whether or not there is a significant difference in scores between the two groups that may possibly be attributed to language acquisition. Additionally, item analyses are completed for all exams so that instruction and test preparation may be tailored in order to improve student performance. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data is reviewed by the principal, cabinet and instructional team on a regular basis i.e. following baseline, periodic and standardized assessments. A closer examination of the data, dissemination and discussion of possible implications are accomplished during monthly whole-staff meetings. A deeper dive into the data is conducted during Bi-Monthly department and grade team meetings. 9  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The TMA has a free standing ENL program. The school delivers standards-based instruction utilizing a variety of pedagogical strategies and classroom materials that integrate listening, speaking, reading and writing and foster critical thinking skills. The materials, aligned to the core curriculum, include native language sources and instructional technology to support both English and the primary language of our English language learners. Furthermore, classrooms are print rich with colored word walls, pictures, student work and charts modeling correct language usage, reading strategies, and writing skills. Teachers create opportunities for our ELLs to interact with peers in small heterogeneous groups to encourage peer to peer learning and small homogeneous groups led by en ENL certified teacher to rigorously develop English proficiency across all modalities. Students are heterogeneously grouped and scheduled for freestanding ENL classes per CR Part154.2. EM students receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. TR students receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Pursuant to the CR Part 154 mandates, ENL Emerging and Emerging students receive 360 minutes of instruction in their ELA and Writing classes each week. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes per week. Spanish Native Language students receive Native Language instruction from a certified Spanish teacher for 45 minute long class periods and are taught a Spanish curriculum. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students engage in project based learning that supports language development through the Social Studies curriculum. All ELLs are provided with a variety of instructional strategies to assist them in the development of academic language and literacy. The six major types of scaffolding – modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text-representation and meta-cognition, are incorporated into each lesson to facilitate higher order thinking. Our ENL teacher coaches and models for other staff to support scaffolding learning for ELLs in their classrooms across all content areas. Effective practices such as graphic organizers, semantic maps, modeled writing, and read aloud foster academic language development. Furthermore, teachers receive professional development in scaffolding learning for ELLs and integrating content and language goals for ELLs. The ENL teacher guides his colleagues through differentiation practices that enable the Language learners to a better and quicker understanding of the concepts that are being taught. Modeling of activities and conferences are one of the ways the ENL teachers provide content area support for ELL's. The ENL teacher also collaborates with the content area teachers and supports and help students with their assignments. The curriculum he follows is aligned with the content area subjects. Paragraph and essay writing in ELA, Social Studies, Math and Science is emphasized. In addition to the differentiated instruction delivered in the classroom, this year, Newcomers (students in US schools less than three years) participate in the Rosetta Stone in the Classroom interactive language immersion program to increase English fluency and comprehension. 0  These students also participate in small group tutorials during after -school, four times weekly to develop reading and writing skills. The school uses vocabulary builder interactive flashcards, CCLS, Penguin Readers, NYC Performance Tasks and teacher-created materials to foster language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Instructional Team ensures in collaboration with administration and the Testing Coordinator that students are routinely evaluated in their home languages throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated according to subgroup designation as per CR Part 154 mandates. Thurgood Marshall appropriately plans for SIFE students as need arises. Differentiation is a daily practice in the school's ESL classrooms. Lesson plans are crafted to assure differentiation at the level of product and process, product and content. SIFE students are offered extra support through the after-school program. In addition, a smaller free standing ENL classes have been designed for SIFE's and ELLs with low NYSESLAT scores to provide these students with more one on one and small group time with the instructor. The focus of the school's free-standing ENL program is on those ELLs that have been in the country less than three years. These students receive double-blocks of Integrated ENL daily, in addition to after school ENL and, in some cases, push-in support. C&D) ELLs that have been in the country and long-term ELLs are treated on more of a case to case basis. Many of them, especially those in the 4-6 year category are mixed in with the newcomers for double-block ENL periods, based on their NYSESLAT scores. While the majority of long-term ELLs are either given a single period of ENL or receive push-in or after school support. All classroom libraries have been stocked with English-Spanish and English-French dictionaries and a wide array of texts that are of high interest and accesible to ELLs. For lower level ELLs ENL classrooms offer a wide array of class sets of the Oxford Bookworms Series for ELLs. The school also has numerous copies of the Oxford Picture Dictionary for students who are in their first year in the country and as of yet have minimal English. The ENL classrooms also have highly differentiated and engaging independent reading libraries. The National Geographic Edge Series is also used by the ENL teacher. Newcomers are placed according to their NYSITELL levels. Where possible, they are partnered with a native language speaking student in their core content area classes. They are also strongly encouraged to attend after-school tutorial. ELL's receiving service for 4-6 years are placed according to their NYSESLAT scores. Students are encouraged to attend after-school English classes and are supported in their native language by Foreign Language teachers. Former ELL students are supported for 1-2 years after receiving proficiency scores on the NYSESLAT exam. Proficient students are placed in ENL/ELA classes. Additionally, they receive test accommodations identical to that of current ELL students. Accommodations include extended time, translated tests, glossaries and dictionaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Should a student's Individualized Educational Plan mandate bilingual instruction, the school attempts to place the student in a school where such as program is offered. Thurgood Marshall Academy has two class sections in grades 6-8 and either three or four in grades 9-12. Each class receives a double period of instruction in ELA and Social Studies and typically 1 period per day in Writing or Study Skills. Where possible, each class is co-taught by the ESL Certified Teacher and a General Education Writing or SS Teacher for a minimum of 4, 90 minute classes per week. This is done by the ESL Teacher. The students are evaluated for age-appropriate material through Running Records and other teacher designed assessments. In addition, the school has implemented a school-wide literacy focus with emphasis on utilizing UDL strategies in content area classes. The school works with the Freyer Model for vocabulary, sentence frames for writing, flexible grouping, teaching of academic language and utilization of the DOK framework. 1  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Based on their IEP classification, ELL-SWD's receive flexible scheduling. Students are programmed for physical education, health, foreign language and all electives in general education classes. Teachers use UDL strategies and ELL instructional strategies such as close reading, phonics, grouping, various discussion techniques and socratic seminar to enable ELL-SWD's to attain their IEP goals and English proficiency. SWD are also closely monitored by the Guidance Counselors as well as Related Service Providers and the Special Education staff. Each student is programmed with all accommodations included in his/her IEP, including ELL services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention for ELL's in ELA are provided such as tutoring and Response to Intervention. Math is offered for double periods and during after-school. In Social Studies, visual thinking strategies, graphic organizers. context clues and word banks are used. The use of specific interventions vary and are based on data from course grades, teacher anecdotals, standardized exams and benchmark performance. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A Saturday Intensive program to address writing and reading modalities will continue. The RTI process will be refined to expand and clarify teachers' understanding and implementation of RTI. We will conduct lesson plan and student work studies to better understand students' thought processes, strengths and weaknesses. In addition, school wide teacher collaboration on instruction of ELL students will be implemented. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have equal access to all school programs including regular school-day courses, after-school enrichment and extra-curricular programs. PSAL Girls Varsity and Boys varsity and Junior Varsity is also offered to all students. Regents Prep, tutoring and credit recovery and online coursework through PLATO are offered. Students are issued individual notices of offerings and enrollment packets. Lead Teachers from each grade and the two Guidance Counselors ensure students are invited and informed of all programs and activities. ELL students are encouraged to participate in events and activities that bolster the general English population's knowledge of multiculturalism, such as the various heritage celebrations. ELLs are involved in the dance and theatre performances. After school tutoring concentrates on both beginners who need tailored support across the modalities as well as as advanced students who want to discuss literature or receive Regents exam help. Such after school tutoring supplement students' core curriculum through graphic organizers, dictionaries, vocabulary strategies and reading activities (i.e. how to search for terms in the dictionary, vocabulary bookmarkers, games, etc). Also, after school tutoring helps ELLs with standardized exam preparations, especially with useful language strategies which can be brought to the test taking situation. Supplemental counseling is offered to ELLs through the Guidance Counselors. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of instructional material is used in ESL classes and in the school (content areas and in the library) to help support ELL students. In the ESL classroom, a variety of reading materials, word-to-word, and English dictionary posters, text readers, and classical literature are staggered by levels and student interests. Classroom libraries are provided for students to peruse for independent and supported reading. Graphic organizers, charts, and anticipation guides are part of the usual routine and aid in differentiating instructions even within level. Film and visuals are used to support writing and reading, as well as to stir creative thinking and imagination. responsible internet use for research and study is encouraged and taught in class. In addition, documentary and historical websites such as PBS and History Channel are used to support text material and offer background videos or timelines. Teachers routinely utilize resources found online at DELLSS and TeachNYC.org search Furthermore, should 2  a student have an IEP that calls for additional help in the classroom with a paraprofessional, then tat student is supplied with such aid. The instructional materials used to support the learning of ELLs (including content area as well as language materials) are textbooks, bilingual glossary, dictionary, journals, newspapers, test samplers, language lab, REALIA, video, CD/tape player/recorder, CD ROMS, computer/internet access, field trips, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Should we have NLA, explicit instruction would be delivered to ELLs by using their native language to assist them in the acquisition of English proficiency. If we have TBE, we would follow the 60%-40%; 50%-50%; 70%-30% policy. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. While taking into account the ELLs' grade levels, required services support and resources correspond mostly to their proficiency levels. Currently, most ELLs travel together by age and grade cohort although proficiency levels must be factored into the equation. Classroom material and instructional support are age, grade, and level specific and are staggered for student ability and within the common ESL classroom. Furthermore, in class text books and reading libraries are labeled for student ease either for English proficiency levels or subject matter. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are mandated to participate in our income students Summer Academy. This orientation assist incoming students with their basic skills and plan for improvement. Regular school pedagogues run the summer program in order to acquire and use data to properly program students for the fall. The summer program includes team building activities, graduation and promotion requirement seminars, diagnostic exams, scavenger hunts and an interview with the ESL teacher. One of the Assistant Principal's and the ESL teacher runs this summer orientation. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? TMA offers Spanish and French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All personnel, including ESL teachers, receive professional development on ESL and ELA standards; on pedagogy, including individualized instruction, workshop model, Ramp-up, QTEL, Word Gen, mastery learning, questioning technique; and needs specific to ELLs. Teachers participate in weekly learning walks and inter-visitations. Every effort is made to align instruction with the standards. The, professional development plan for all ELL personnel at our school will include and be held as follows: September- ESL program framework, student identification process 3  October- data collection and analysis November- Strengthening Communication with ELLs December-March- Exploration of Instructional strategies such as Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP), Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA), Academic Language Scaffolding (ACL), etc. April- June- Monitoring student progress in each modality, RTI to support all students As they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards in supporting ELLs , teachers of ELLs are offered professional development in methodologies and strategies that can be incorporated into the balance literacy program that will enhance the language acquisition of our ELLs. Collaborative approach where teachers focus on instructional approaches that articulate long-range teaching strategies. Teachers will also be attuned to the variables that affect language learning and instruction: age, grade, placement, personality, educational background, level of proficiency in both the native language and English, parental support, needs of the student and resources available to the teachers. Demonstrations and modeling will be the focus of much of the instructional presentations. These include providing many nonverbal clues such as pictures, objects, gestures, and intonation cues. As competency develops, other strategies include building from language that is understood, using graphic organizers, hands-on learning opportunities, and cooperative or peer tutoring techniques. Language components will be stressed. Vocabulary study (which is excellent for all students) will be a pivotal piece and ELL students will work with a buddy. Staff development will also focus on testing accommodation and alternate assessments, stressing assessments that are not totally writing-dependent and specific strategies which have been successful with ELLs. These professional development activities will take place during some of our monthly faculty conferences and/or department meetings. Records are maintained by the various facilitators, supervisors, and ESL coordinator. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary and/or middle to high school, the ELLs are introduced to our staff who are encouraged to take the time out to be a resource. Staff may consult with ESL teachers for clarification and assistance on how to assist the ELLs The 15 hours of ELL training for all staff (including non-ELL teachers) will include ESL methodologies and strategies, establishing active learning projects, using portfolios to assess performance, modifying assignments, providing opportunities for discussion, repeat, check for understanding, interactive word/phrase boards, engaging in teacher reflections, curriculum mapping. Administrators/supervisors, Teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, related services staff, secretaries, parent coordinators, etc. will learn/be exposed to how to use ESL methodologies and techniques in ESL classrooms as well as in the general education classrooms. Such methodologies include scaffolding, use of Realia, art and role-play to aid in comprehension. The ESL teacher uses instructional material that incorporates colorful graphics, text, vocabulary definitions, graphic organizers, and big-book. The training will be led by certified ESL teachers and/or specialists and all staff will be afforded opportunities to discuss current research, best practices, materials, NYS-ESL standards, instructional strategies and alignment to core curriculum and the application of core knowledge. The Professional development workshops always include an ELL portion that is geared towards training ELL and non ELL teachers. Attendance is kept through the signing of attendance sheets. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? To encourage continuing community involvement, ELL parents are very involved in the life of our school. During the school year, parents are provided with meetings/workshops focusing on instructional issues, such as assessments, standards, promotional policies, and strategies for them to support children’s academic progress. Other parents are involved in our 4  Saturday Academy and related programs. As part of our effort to strengthen the parental involvement, many members of our school community are bilingual and ensure communication between the school and the home. Parent coordinator, guidance counselors, teachers and administrators/supervisors are frequently in touch with parents about academic involvement, students achievement and attendance. They encourage ELL parents in particular to contact them with questions or for further updates either at the school or at home. Parental contact contact involves updates on students concerns as well as acknowledgement of student progress. Parental concerns such as request for extra help through tutoring programs are also implemented, and attempts are made to communicate with parents in their native language when possible either through their own accompanying interpreters or by a faculty/staff that is proficient in the language and through using the Office of Translation and Interpretation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The school takes measures to ensure that ELL parents are aware of upcoming events that are offered by the DOE, as for example, with community meetings offered by the DOE's Office of ELL. Information that is gathered is printed out in different languages as well as in English, and as per the primary languages parents and students communicate with at this school. Also, parents are encouraged to keep track of their students and their progress with technology. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sean Davenport, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Thurgood Marshall Academy School DBN: 05M670 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mr. Sean Davenport Title Principal Ms. Marcella Carr Assistant Principal Ms. Princila Amoakoa Parent Coordinator Mr. Papa Tall ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Ms. Yolanda Tomlin Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Katherine McDowell Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Mrs. Tamelia James School Counselor Ms. Danika Rux Ms. Mary Norwood Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 05M670 School Name: ThurgoodMarshall Academy Superintendent: Ms. DanikaRux The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Gyl Bartholomew Guidance Counselor Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Thurgood Marshall Academy uses multiple data sources to assess the language needs and preferences of parents/guardians and visitors seeking general and enrollment information. The Language Identification Guide and informational brochures are prominently visible throughout the school building including the Main Office where all initial interactions occur. Once the greeting staff member seeks to ascertain the purpose of the parent/guardian's visit and encounters hesitancy or response in a language other than English, the staff member will direct the parent/guardian's attention to the Language Identification Guide for the parent/guardian to select their preferred language. If it is a language spoken by a staff member, that staff member will assist the parent. The parent will also be given an informational brochure. If the preferred language is not spoken by a staff member, the Translation Unit will be called. Parents of Incoming students new to the NYCDOE are given the HLIS which the parent notes in section 3 if a non-English language is spoken at home. School personnel are made aware of the languages spoken by parents so that they may translate correspondence and/or arrange verbal interpretation services in advance for scheduled meetings. Students are given new blue contact cards annually for parental completion. Again, school personnel maintain logs of preferred languages as noted on the blue cards and 8  correspond with parents accordingly. Additionally, the Pupil Accounting Secretary ensures periodic review and dissemination to school leaders and staff of the RCPL. Students are asked their parents' preferred language, and, parents are asked routinely in the monthly Parent coordinator's Newsletter. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish French/Haitian Arabic English 92 6 6 705 11.1 .72 .72 85.04 94 6 6 700 11.34 .72 .72 84.44 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Back to School letter 08/17 Parent-Teacher Conference 11/9 Condom Availability Promotion in Doubt 09/7 02/5 Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Use Google Translator and the Office of Translation during summer Download the translated versions from the NYCDOE website and place on school letterhead Download the translated version from the NYCDOE website and place on school letterhead Download the translated version from the NYCDOE website and place on school letterhead 9  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Date How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conference 11/9-10 & 3/8-9 Portfolio Review Afternoon 05/3 09/28 06/19 Curriculum Night Orientation interpretation service(s)? Have applicable in-house staff on site, telephone the number on the postings of the Translation and Interpretation Unit Have applicable in-house bilingual staff on site, call the Translation and Interpretation Unit Have applicable in-house bilingual staff on site, call the Translation and Interpretation Unit Have applicable in-house bilingual staff on site, call the Translation and Interpretation Unit 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit to translate written communication to parents in the 9 covered languages. School Messenger System will send translated messages by telephone in the event of an emergency. If necessary, the school will contract authorized vendors to translate emergency messages in languages other than those translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will receive a copy of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 electronically and a hard copy in their staff handbook at the beginning of the year. New staff members hired during the year will also receive the regulation. All staff will be informed of the resources available for parents. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 0  In order to make parents aware of their right to receive translation information, Thurgood Marshall Academy displays multi-language posters and the Bill of Rights provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit at the entrance as well as other prominent areas of the school building. The school utilizes the translation services of School Messenger to send home telephone messages about important events such as PTA, Parent-Teacher conferences and general information. The Bill of Rights and A Parents Guide to Special Education printed in multiple languages are posted in the Main Office, Parent Coordinator', Guidance and administration offices. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school uses feedback from parent surveys to improve the quality, timeliness and mode of school-home communications. In addition, the Parent Coordinator reaches out to parents regularly to assess effectiveness of home-school communication and keeps track of feedback to share with administration. The school has increased the languages that written and telephone messages are sent. A sign language interpreter will be hired on an needed basis. 1 
