 02M933 School Name: CITY KNOLL MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: KAYE KERR   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: City Knoll Middle School 310200010933 School Number (DBN): 02M933 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 6-8 School Address: 425 W. 33 rd Street, New York, NY 10001 Phone Number: 212-695-9115 Fax: 212-695-9615 School Contact Person: KayeKerr Email Address: kkerr@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kaye Kerr Karen Myrie CarmenSerrano Karen Myrie Sabrina Melendez None None District Information Geographical District: 2 Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy Superintendent’s Office Address: 333 7 th Avenue, Room 712, New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Email Address: blaboy@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 212-356-3815 Fax: 212-356-7514 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Manhattan Executive Director: Yuet Chu Executive Director’s Office Address: 333 7 th Avenue, 8 th floor, New York, NY 10001 Executive Director’s Email Address: YChu@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 646.470.0721 Fax: 917.339.1765   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kaye Kerr Karen Myrie CarmenSerrano Sabrina Melendez Alana Jermanok Angela DeLaCruz LaureyBriere Melanie Gunn *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA Member/ Member/ Member/ Teacher-UFTmember Member/ Teacher-UFTmember Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jay Gardner Mildred Cordova Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? City Knoll Middle School Mission Section 4: CEP Overview Our school prepares students to realize their dreams through commitment to academic excellence, collaboration, and creativity. We empower our school community with the knowledge that the process of arranging words and images on a page, or utilizing technologies to communicate a message can move ideas to the hearts and minds of others to produce a call to action. We develop and support creative, inquisitive, articulate, well-informed individuals who upon graduation are capable of successfully shaping their own futures.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. City Knoll Middle School opened its doors in September 2014 and reached scale in the 2016-17 school year with a sixth, seventh and eighth grade class with three classes on each grade level. The school graduated its first eighth grade class in June 2017 . We believe that students learn best when they are provided with authentic opportunities to engage in inquiry, research and reflection through language rich learning designed around a culminating project that makes connections across disciplines. Through a deep awareness of and respect for diversity and culture, students become responsible advocates for themselves, their communities, and the world. The integration of the arts, including visual arts and music, and technology, the school supports communication through the presentation of knowledge and ideas. Public speaking and performance are strong components of the school’s approach that build on students’ abilities to manage multiple forms of texts and engage them in meaningful and unique ways. CKMS incorporates community resources through key partnerships to connect and enrich the learning experience for students and professional staff. These include the Museum of Modern Art, Manhattan Youth, the Department of Education Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI), Algebra for All, and Urban Advantage. In the 2017 – 2018 school year we started a new partnership with SuitUp, an organization that helps students in low-income communities become exposed to careers in diverse private sector jobs. SuiteUp brings companies into the classroom (or students to the company) to engage them in a one day business competition to reinforce skills learned in class and to help students see how their work in school connects to the real world. In the 2018 – 2019 school year, City Knoll Middle School will implement a new Advisory program. During Summer 2018, teachers will participate in Restorative Circles training to help prepare them for the Advisory Program. Teachers will use the Restore 360 curriculum and restorative practices to support students’ academic and social emotional growth. Our AIS program targets students who scored in performance Levels 1 – 2 on the ELA and Mathematics State assessment. Students in the program are provided with targeted small group instruction according to their needs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Education students represent approximately 28.7% of the school population. There is one Integrated co-teaching classes in each of the sixth and seventh grade levels, and two classes in the seventh grade. Teachers collaborate in a variety of configurations to develop supports to meet the needs of students. Students identified as English language learners (ELLs) comprise approximately 7% of the student body. English Language Learners at City   Knoll Middle School speak Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, and Russian. Students are supported through a blended model including stand-alone English as a New Language (ENL) classes, and integrated co-teaching in all content areas as outlined by their English language level and alignment to CR Part 154 regulations. In preparation for the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT), the school offers weekly test preparation leading up to the exam as well as a Saturday Academy program. The Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) coach works with teachers in English Language Arts as well as the other content areas to provide support with addressing struggling readers. Mathematics and ELA are areas of focus and support, as many students enter CKMS with low levels of achievement in these content areas. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. CKMS continues to grow in all aspects of the Framework for Great Schools. Rigorous instruction and collaborative teachers have allowed students and staff to expand their potential and build capacity. The development of interdisciplinary curriculum with the support of NYC Outward Bound has strengthened teacher capacity to create and implement Common Core aligned curriculum. The key areas of instructional focus for this year is multiple entry points (including differentiation, scaffolds, multiple intelligences), and assessment practices to continue to make adjustments to meet student needs . These areas are being supported through professional learning, consultants, and opportunities to visit other schools. The Quality Review rubric and Danielson Framework guide the school’s ongoing development. The school is also focused on building community among all constituencies, supporting the well-being of students and staff through mindfulness and wellness initiatives, thus fostering a supportive environment and strong family-community ties. Student Led Conferences are differentiated by grade level and conducted in the Fall and Spring with nearly 100% participation rates. An eighth grade Passage Portfolio Presentation as an exit/graduation experience is accomplished by all eighth graders. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 02M933 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 236 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 8 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 18 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 71.2% % Reduced Lunch 8.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 50.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 0% 53% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 34 32 91.0% 3.8% 30.1% 25.4% 9.7% 4.2% 2 47% 3 22.4% 43% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YSH N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Of the approximately 230 total students in grades 6, 7 and 8 who took the Performance Series, Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) exams in Mathematics at the end of the year in May 2018, an average of 9% of students scored far above grade level (above the 89th percentile), an average of 23% of students scored above the middle range (between the 60th and 88th percentile), an average of 40% of students scored in the middle range at grade level (23rd to 59th percentile) and 28% of students scored far below grade level (below the 22nd percentile). In English Language Arts, an average of 5% of students scored far above grade level (above the 89th percentile), an average of 16% of students scored above the middle range (between the 60th and 88th percentile), an average of 37% of students scored in the middle range at grade level (23rd to 59th percentile) and 42% of students scored far below grade level (below the 22nd percentile). By May 2017 82.6% of all students made significant gains in mathematics as measured by the Performance Series Assessment. However, only 42.1% of the students tested made significant gains on the ELA assessment. Performance Series Assessment. School strengths ● Attention to student’s academic performance. Data sources include Spring 2018 NYS ELA & Math Assessments, MOSL baseline testing - Performance Series in ELA & Math, NYC Performance tasks in Science & Social Studies, and Degrees of Reading Power (DRP), as well as student report cards and progress reports. ● CKMS instructional focus this year is Literacy Across the Content Areas. Teachers will work to improve students’ literacy skills through strategy instruction across all content areas. Students will work to independently use different reading strategies to improve comprehension of complex texts School Needs  The school continues to develop strategies, approaches and curriculum to support improved student proficiency rates in both English Language Arts and Mathematics Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2  By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of students, including Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners, who show significant gains from the September (baseline) to the May (year-end) administration of the Performance Series Assessments (MOSL) in both Reading and Mathematics. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). CKMS implements NYC Core Curriculum materials including Engage NY materials and Connected Math Program (CMP3), Passport to Social Studies, and Common Core aligned teacher created units of study in Science. This is reviewed throughout the school year via cycles of observation, learning walks, and weekly content area and grade level meetings. The school does a mid-year and end-of-year evaluation including review of curriculum, teacher team work and community based partnerships. All staff are involved in this work. The Principal, Assistant Principal and Teacher Leaders meet as an instructional cabinet to review student work samples to determine the effectiveness of literacy strategies being taught in the content areas and plan next steps for teachers and students. Teacher leaders will work with department and grade level teams to review data and plan next steps for instruction. The Academic Intervention program (AIS) will support the needs of struggling students through small group instruction and targeted skills development. Students will be grouped based on performance data from NYS ELA & Math assessments and are supported in either ELA, Mathematics or both. Groupings will be revisited to re-configure periodically based on student progress data. After-school programs will support homework and test prep. High Achievers will receive enrichment. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers, data specialist, Principal, Assistant Principal (AP), and para-professionals All students including SWDs and ELLs Beginning September 2018 and continuing every month throughout the school year until June 2019 All teachers including SETSS, ELL, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Data Specialist All students including SWDs and ELLs Beginning after baseline DRP data and item analysis data for all grades released. AIS services begins on September 10, 2018 and continues through June 26, 2019 City Knoll Middle School has partnered with the Teachers College Readers and Writers Project to provide English Language Arts teachers with on-site literacy staff development. All teachers Beginning September 11, 2018 and continuing through Teacher Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal, TC Staff Developer 4 City Knoll Middle School will continue to partner with the Department of Education’s Middle School Quality Initiative, to provide on-site professional development in Literacy to content areas across the grade. June 26, 2019 Afterschool Professional Development will be conducted on an ongoing weekly basis and will focus on building Literacy Skills schoolwide. During this time, teachers will have the opportunity to present strategies learned during off-site professional learning opportunities, revise unit and lesson plans to include new literacy strategies, look at student work, review and analyze student assessment data, design assessments measure student progress in literacy. The PD Committee, comprised of members of the Teacher Leadership team and the Administrative cabinet, will Plan and facilitate the weekly professional development for staff. Parent workshops and/ or Coffee Chats will be conducted on an ongoing monthly basis. Facilitated by the Parent Coordinator and School Social Worker, topics will include behavioral expectations, Common Core, literacy development, supporting homework, building confidence, NYC as classroom, High School Application Process, social media etc. Parents Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Dean of Students, teachers and Teacher Leaders, Principal and Assistant Principal Beginning with Curriculum Night on September 27, 2018 and continuing through June 26th 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops and/ or Coffee Chats will be conducted on an ongoing monthly basis and will include topics such as behavioral expectations, Common Core, literacy development, supporting homework, building confidence, NYC as classroom, High School Application Process, social media, etc. Parents will be surveyed at the beginning of the school year to identify convenient times for conducting workshops and meetings, as well as topics of interest. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, NYC Core Curriculum, trade books, computer software including IXL, Performance Series, and after-school per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Performance Series assessments will be administered in ELA and Mathematics in late January, at the mid-year point, to check for progress toward the 5% increase in the number of students, including Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners, who show significant gains from the September (baseline) to the May (year-end) administration of the Performance Series Assessments (MOSL) in both Reading and Mathematics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Performance Series assessments in ELA and Mathematics (baseline, mid-year, and end of year) will be administered and used to measure student progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? City Knoll Middle School continues to work towards building a safe and positive environment that is inclusive to all learners and cultures in our school community. The school employs a full time social worker and guidance counselor to continue to support all students and families in our school community including our Title I families and families living in temporary housing. For the 2018 – 2019 school year, the school will employ a full time Dean of Students who will work with students in developing positive behavior habits to ensure their success in Middle School. The school community, including all constituents, will collaborate on an ongoing basis to support students to become their best selves. The school will also continue to make concerted efforts to address the many needs present in students' lives outside of the school day which impact their academic performance, such as neglect, homelessness, and mental illness, among others. According to the Online Occurrence Reporting System, during the 2017 - 2018 school year, City Knoll Middle School recorded 36 Level 3 infractions, 38 Level 4 infractions and 7 level 5 infractions. In 2016 – 2017 school year, City Knoll Middle School recorded 80 Level 3 infractions, 15 level 4 infractions and 0 level 5 infractions. Although this represents a ~15% decrease in level 3 – 5 infractions, only 65% of the students on the 2017 – 2018 Learning Environment survey reported that they felt safe in school and only 24% of the students surveyed stated that students never harass, bully, or intimidate other students in the school. Note: Level 3 infractions are considered “Disruptive Behavior”, Level 4 infractions are considered “Aggressive or Injurious/Harmful Behavior”, and Level 5 infractions are considered to be “Seriously Dangerous or Violent Behavior”. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2018 City Knoll Middle School will see a 15% decrease in the total number of level 3, level 4, and level 5 infractions among the student body on Online Occurrence Reports (OORs) as compared to data from June 2018. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Beginning September 2018 City Knoll Middle School will provide students with an Advisory program that will take place one period a week. Teachers will utilize an advisory curriculum designed by the school Guidance Counselor and Social Worker based on the Restore 360 curriculum. The Dean of Student will facilitate three different Advisory groups (one per grade) targeting high behavioral risk students. Students in the Dean’s Advisory group will be selected based on OSYD data and teacher team recommendations. Teachers participated in Restorative Circles training over the summer and will continue to receive training from the Guidance Counselor and School Social Worker. Restorative Circles will be used during Advisory Groups and during Homeroom to help build community amongst the students and staff. Beginning September 2018 City Knoll Middle School will utilize a Homeroom structure to build a sense of community among students in each Homeroom class, grade, and school. Homeroom classes will meet four times a day (at arrival, before lunch, after lunch, at the end of the day) with extended homeroom in the morning and after lunch. Teachers participated in Restorative Circles training over the summer and will continue to receive training from the Guidance Counselor and School Social Worker. Restorative Circles will be used during Advisory Groups and during Homeroom to help build community amongst the students and staff. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept 5, 2018 - June 26, 2019 11 - Advisory Groups with one Advisor per group, 8 - Homeroom Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Dean of Students, Principal, Assistant Principal. All students Sept 5, 2018 - June 26, 2019 8 – Homeroom teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal Support the development of a peer mediation program. Teachers, Students Sept 5, 2018 - June 26, 2019 Teachers, Dean of Students, Principal, and Assistant Principal City Knoll Middle School will conduct school Spirit Days, monthly recognition of perfect and improved attendance, and Student of the Month luncheons, Section Sheet competitions, and grade level assemblies. All school constituents Oct 1, 2018 - June 26, 2019 All school constituents City Knoll Middle School will use a daily class Section Sheet to monitor and track students’ behaviors and work habits as the homeroom travels from class to class. Teachers will score class Teachers, Students and families September 5, 2018 – Homeroom Teachers, Grade Team Members, 8 June 26, 2019 Paraprofessionals, Dean of Students, Families, Principal, Assistant Principal All Students September 5, 2018 – June 26, 2019 Students, Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 September 5, 2018 – June 26, 2019 Teachers, Manhattan Youth, Paraprofessionals, Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers, Students, Dean of Students, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Principal, Assistant Principal performance each period based on a rubric that assesses to what extent the students were Ready, Responsible and Respectful. Teachers will provide the class with a score of 1 – 5 each period and record notes if necessary. The Dean of students will monitor and track class and individual student progress on a weekly basis and provide classes with rewards based on their section sheet progress. The Dean of Students will meet with teacher Grade Teams on a monthly basis to discuss class/ student progress and support teachers with coming up with academic and behavioral intervention plans when necessary. The Dean of students will work with teachers to monitor the progress of plans put in place for individual students and/ or classes. Outreach by the Dean of Students and Grade Team members will be made to families. Instructional Programs that lead to a supportive environment include the Advisory Program, Sixth grade literacy support through the ExpandEd Extra after school program, and guided reading groups in the after school program. English language learners are supported during through small group instruction using best practice strategies and scaffolds. All students including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities have access to all programs offered by the school and are provided with opportunities for extra help through office hours provided by teachers, and study labs in the after school program. Parental Engagement activities that support families to understand student achievement include Progress Reports, and Report Cards that include content area course numerical averages will be provided three times each school year. Parent Teacher Conferences will be conducted two times for the year where student strengths and challenges are shared with families so that parents and guardians can understand how they can further support their children at home. A celebration of learning will take place once in the Spring. During this time, students will showcase their learning for the year in each subject area. Translators support our families who speak other languages (Arabic, Spanish, Russian, Chinese, and Portuguese). Workshops and/ or Coffee Chats hosted by the Parent Coordinator and School Social Worker for parents will be provided on a monthly basis. Topics will include Supporting Literacy with your Child, Social Media, The HS Application Process, NYC as a Learning Environment, ELL classes, Resources for Families, the use of Pupil Path - our online grading platform etc. Families will be surveyed throughout the school year to identify topics of interest. Curriculum Night will be conducted in September 2018 to share information with parents. The school website is maintained with a wealth of information of interest to the community. A phone messaging system and email blasts are also used to inform families of upcoming events, and student attendance. City Knoll Middle School has partnered with the New York Psychoanalytic Society and Institute (NYPSI). Through this program, City Knoll Middle School will have an Extern, who will Students, Families September 2018 – June 2019 Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, MFSC School Mental 9 provide free Mental Health Services to students and families in the school in order to improve and expand mental health services for children and their families. The goal of the program is to: 1) educate children and parents about emotional wellness and early identification of children and/or teenagers in need of mental health services; (2) promote the engagement of families; (3) establish physical environments that encourage children and families to participate in services when needed; and (4) to create processes that facilitate prompt referral and access to assessment and treatment services when needed. Health Consultant, Principal, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parental Engagement activities that support families to understand student achievement include Progress Reports, and Report Cards that include content area course numerical averages will be provided three times each school year. Parent Teacher Conferences will be conducted two times for the year where student strengths and challenges are shared with families so that parents and guardians can understand how they can further support their children at home. A celebration of learning will take place once in the Spring. During this time, students will showcase their learning for the year in each subject area. Translators support our families who speak other languages (Arabic, Spanish, Russian, Chinese, and Portuguese). Workshops and/ or Coffee Chats hosted by the Parent Coordinator and School Social Worker for parents will be provided on a monthly basis. Topics will include Supporting Literacy with your Child, Social Media, The HS Application Process, NYC as a Learning Environment, ELL classes, Resources for Families, the use of Pupil Path - our online grading platform etc. Families will be surveyed throughout the school year to identify topics of interest. Curriculum Night will be conducted in September 2018 to share information with parents. The school website is maintained with a wealth of information of interest to the community. A phone messaging system and email blasts are also used to inform families of upcoming events, and student attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Dean of Students, per session/ per diem allocations for time to plan for the implementation of celebrations, workshops, and CKMS Learning Environment Survey. Light snacks and refreshments for workshops and meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  By the end of February 2018, the school will review OORs data to measure progress toward a reduction in level 3, 4, and 5 infractions among the student body. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Online Occurrence Reporting system data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016 Framework for Great Schools Report indicated a score of 4.29 for City Knoll Middle School based on results from the NYC School Survey in the Collaborative Teachers category which included such areas as Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction, Quality of Professional Development, School Commitment, Innovation, Peer Collaboration, and Collective Responsibility. These areas were identified as strong areas of the report with an overall average above 4.00. The School Quality Snapshot for 2015-16 indicates that teachers feel good about how well they work together. The school was also rated Proficient in their Spring 2015 Quality Review on indicator 4.2 - Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. As a new school, it is incumbent to establish a plan for creating an environment that fosters and emphasizes both teacher and student collaboration. Our core values and character traits both focus on the value of collaboration for successful pedagogy. In addition, the socio-emotional needs of teachers and students alike are served by an environment of trust, intentionality and open-minded partnerships. The school has developed two interdisciplinary units of study on all grade levels that culminate in comprehensive tasks that support in-depth learning with attention to the development of high level, critical thinking skills. Each unit ends with students presenting their knowledge as evidenced by the culminating task during a celebration of learning to which the community is invited, including parents and community based partners. The school utilizes NYC Core Curriculum in core subject areas. Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) testing using Performance Series in ELA and Math and NYC Performance Tasks in Social Studies and Science have shown student growth (as indicated in section 5A). Overall, 74.27% of all students made growth by the end of the year 2017 in ELA and math Performance Series, Measures of Student Learning exams as compared to the beginning of the school year 2016. The needs identified in an analysis of MOSL results include trends and implications for instruction in each core subject area. These identified areas for improvement from end of school year testing and beginning of the new school year baselines are woven into the lessons and planning of the interdisciplinary units each year on each grade level. CKMS continues to support social-emotional development through their advisory program called Exchange Team. Groups are gender based and adults loop with youngsters throughout their middle school years. The school supports students through activities that support adolescent well-being, including the development of healthy relationships and interactions. In the CKMS community the needs are great and require ongoing and strategic approaches to continually improve school culture. We also see a need to continue our “reinvigoration” of Exchange Team, so that CKMS staff embrace ET as a meaningful opportunity for students’ learning and social-emotional growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2  By June 2019 grade teams will plan and participate in a minimum of two team building events to develop strong relationships and build community amongst the City Knoll Middle School students, staff, administrators and families. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly grade level department meetings and grade team meetings will be used for teachers to plan activities to conduct during the team building events. Teacher teams will plan lessons that support students with successfully implementing the team building activities/ tasks. All lessons and activities will be aligned to the common core standards in ELA and/ or Mathematics. Tasks will be designed to promote collaboration between students and staff and amongst staff members, as well as positive student behavior, developing caring and concern for others, establishing positive relationships, making responsible decisions and handling challenging situations constructively and ethically. Multiple entry points including scaffolds, multiple intelligences and differentiation embedded in the lessons and activities support access for all learners including English language learners and students with disabilities. Teachers will participate in Professional Development throughout the year which will focus on strategies for supporting the social and emotional well-being and growth of middle school students Students, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Principal, Assistant Principal September 5, 2018 - June 26, 2019 Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Principal, and Assistant Principa Teachers, Staff September 2018 – June 2019 September 11, 2018 – June 26, 2019 Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Principal, Assistant Principal, NYPSI Extern Teacher Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers, Staff members, and administrators will engage in mini team building activities/ tasks at the start of every Professional Development session. Teachers, Staff, Principal, Assistant Principal Parental Engagement includes workshops to provide information on the work with students to support social-emotional development. An open door policy for conferencing with teachers, administrators and staff will be provided for families during Parent Engagement time. Exposure to initiative games and curriculum to gain insight as to how families can continue to support social-emotional development at home including stress management, anger management and collaborative problem solving. All teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal January 2, 2019 - June 26, 2019 All teachers, students, Principal, Assistant Principal and families 4 Opportunities for all stakeholders to participate and collect feedback data that is shared with students and teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parental Engagement includes workshops to provide information on the work with students to support social-emotional development. An open door policy for conferencing with teachers, administrators and staff will be provided for families during Parent Engagement time. Exposure to initiative games and curriculum to gain insight as to how families can continue to support social-emotional development at home including stress management, anger management and collaborative problem solving. Opportunities for all stakeholders to participate and collect feedback data that is shared with students and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Planning time for teacher teams, professional development time, development of instructional materials, adjustment to schedules to accommodate community building activities, books and other resources, light refreshments for parent workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 and June 2019, staff members will evaluate and synthesize the experience of creating and implementing the team building activities and supporting lessons by completing qualitative survey and reflections developed by the Teacher Leadership Team to measure the effectiveness of the planning, implementation of team building activities/ tasks as well as student outcomes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The City Knoll Middle School Teacher Leadership Team will develop a Qualitative Surveys, and Reflections which will be completed by teachers and students Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. See instructional findings in section 5A. The 2016 Framework for Great Schools Report indicated a score of 4.21 for City Knoll Middle School based on results from the NYC School Survey in the Effective Leadership category which included such areas as Inclusive Leadership, Teacher Influence, Program Coherence, and Instructional Leadership. These areas were identified as strong areas of the report with an overall average above 4.0. CKMS Strengths The CKMS faculty and staff pride themselves on the collaborative spirit of the culture and the inherent support of one another in the teaching and learning process. In the 2016-17 school year, teachers were surveyed at the beginning of the school year to identify their interests and areas in need of improvement. Teachers also set goals for themselves according to the components of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Teachers actively engaged in inquiry work through grade level team meetings, content area meetings, professional development cycles and the work of the Learning Partners Program (LPP). Teachers and staff actively engaged with one another in designing a question, researching strategies, implementing those strategies, and then analyzing student work and outcomes to see if the strategies had an impact on student achievement. Teachers and staff were encouraged to take leadership roles in the various forums present in the school community. School Needs  Engage in and develop a system to reflect more consistently through inquiry work throughout the school year, that includes reviewing student work in order to develop strategic instruction that addresses students needs as well as relevant next steps.  Develop capacity to further leadership development in order to strengthen collaboration, instructional pedagogy, and school culture. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all staff will participate in one data meeting per month using a data protocol in order to uncover patterns and trends in the school data, plan interventions, and improve student outcomes. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrative staff and Teacher Leadership team will develop data protocols for reviewing and analyzing different types of school data Teachers and staff August 2018 - September 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders Staff members will be introduced to different data analysis protocols and will participate in an introductory data meeting analyzing the school survey using a data protocol. Staff members will identify trends in the data focusing on the student perspective of the school community Teacher teams will gather additional classroom data to analyze and discuss during Common Planning Time Meetings (CPTs). Teacher teams will then plan interventions and supports for students based on patterns in the different sets of data. Teacher teams will monitor effectiveness of interventions and supports once a month during CPT meetings. Teacher teams will use a Google doc to record Agendas, Meeting Minutes and Notes for weekly CPT Meetings as evidence. Teachers, and staff September 2018 Teacher Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers and staff Sept 5, 2018 - June 26, 2019 Grade Team Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal Professional Development will be provided for staff on behavior management, de-escalation strategies, crisis intervention strategies and restorative practices. Staff Sept 5, 2018 - June 26, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, NYPSI Extern, Dean of Students, Principal, Assistant Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Data meetings and protocols will be utilized with the SLT. Family meetings and workshops will be held to discuss trends in school wide data a provide families with support in dealing with student social and emotional issues and behavioral challenges. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 7  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, staff, Principal, materials to support leadership development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, teacher teams would have conducted 5 data meetings as measured by data meeting Agendas, notes, and next steps posted in each teams CPT Agenda Google Doc.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas, notes, and next steps posted in each teams CPT Agenda Google Doc. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. City Knoll Middle School opened its doors for the first time in September 2014. Quality Review data collected in Spring 2015 indicated a well developed in Indicator 3.4 - High Expectations, which aligns to the schools beliefs for students and staff. Literacy and math continue to be focus areas for the 2017-18 school year as this was identified as a need area according to NYS ELA and math scores in Spring 2017. The school values support from community based organizations and has established key partnerships that support academic and social-emotional growth of students, including the Museum of Modern Art, NYC Outward Bound, Manhattan Youth, Urban Advantage, Middle School Quality Initiative, Learning Partners Program, Thrive NYC, the Bronx Zoo, the American Museum of Natural History, and the Hudson River Park Trust and Algebra for All. The school is also a welcoming environment for students and families and seeks to continually strengthen relationships with all members of the school community. The school has a PTA, but has had limited parental involvement thus far. A Parent Coordinator joined the school community last school year and she has conducted monthly workshops according to the interests and needs of parents with a focus on supporting students academically and social-emotionally, as well as offer resources to support speakers of other languages, and our special needs population. The school recognizes the need for the support of parents to ensure students’ success. Middle School parents also need support during the transition of their youngsters to becoming more independent and responsible for their learning and actions. The school would like to provide more opportunities for parents to understand what the expectations of the Common Core are and how the school supports their child to reach a better home/school connection in order to further student achievement. Three learning walks were conducted with parents and staff during the 2016-17 school year. Two of these were conducted with parents and staff and one was conducted with staff only. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, CKMS will conduct two learning walks focused on instructional practices and informed by our CEP goals, that include parents and teachers, which are planned in conjunction with the School Leadership Team (SLT) and Parent Teacher Association (PTA), the qualitative findings of which are shared with the school community to celebrate best practices and inform next steps toward identified areas of improvement. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Increase communication regarding learning walks through website, flyers, letters, phone messaging system, and emails. Provide workshops on how to engage in a learning walk and collect evidence according to the identified focus. Conduct learning walks with families and teachers in November 2016, and February/March 2017 to collect evidence of school initiatives including multiple entry points and best practice literacy strategies in classrooms. All families, teachers and school administrators November 1, 2017 - May 30, 2018 All families, teachers and school administrators November 1, 2017 - May 30, 2018 Principal, AP, Community Assistant, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator, SLT & PTA Executive Board Principal, AP, Community Assistant, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator, SLT & PTA Executive Board Principal, AP, Community Assistant, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator, SLT & PTA Executive Board Principal, AP, content area teachers, Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Parents, and Students. In order to build trust, the school will develop and use learning walk data collection tools and post walk debriefs to gather important feedback from families and participants on school wide initiatives and instructional practices. This information is shared with all constituencies. All families, teachers and school administrators November 1, 2017 - May 30, 2018 Parental Engagement time is scheduled every week on Mondays from 3:20 to 4:00 pm. Teachers make outreach to families on a regular basis to communicate information on student progress and behavior, as well as schedule parent conferences as needed. All families, teachers and school administrators Sept 7, 2017 - June 26, 2018. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. see action plan on Parental Engagement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 0  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Leadership Team planning time, teacher release time for debriefs and discussion, materials and time for communication Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, the school will have carried out 1 of 2 learning walks, shared findings with the school community and create plans for the final walk of the school year in order to gather information and feedback that promotes continual school improvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Information captured on a tool that is collaboratively created by the school staff, SLT and PTA, during both learning walks (conducted by November 2017 and March 2018) by participants is analyzed, documented and shared with all school constituents to promote continual school improvement. Participation and Attendance Rates for each Learning Walk also inform the scope of parental engagement. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) guided reading through Exchange Support program, targeted skill development, specific support provided during after-school program targeted skill development during Exchange Support program, specific support provided during after-school program targeted skill development during Exchange Support program, specific support provided during after-school program targeted skill development during Exchange Support program, specific support provided during after-school program small group and individual counseling Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA Standardized test scores, Performance Series data, Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) NYS Math Standardized test scores, Performance Series data NYS ELA & Math Standardized test scores, Performance Series data in ELA & Math, NYC Performance Task in Science (MOSL) NYS ELA & Math Standardized test scores, Performance Series data in ELA & Math, NYC Performance Task in Social Studies (MOSL) As needed, students exhibiting the need for counseling, specific referrals and requests, and identified by specific data sources Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) small group, one-to-one, tutoring, clubs, office hours When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) during the school day, and after school small group, one-to-one, tutoring, clubs, office hours during the school day, and after school small group, tutoring, during the school day, and after school office hours small group, tutoring, clubs, office hours during the school day, and after school small group, individual during the school day 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 20 students The school ensures that all parents complete the Mckinney Vento Survey that is used to identify students in temporary housing who are not currently living in a shelter. The school does its best to identify students living with families who are doubled up or living with other family members as they do not have their own place to live. The school provides an after school program through Manhattan Youth, which provides Study Labs to support the completion of homework and the use of computers for those students who do not have a space at home to do school work. All students at City Knoll Middle School including those in temporary housing have full and equal opportunities to succeed and participate in all offered experiences. The availability of transportation services are communicated to identified STH families and support provided to acquire services. The school Social Worker meets with school personnel and provides workshops to communicate best practices as to how the educational and emotional needs of STH and their families can be best met. All students at the school who are identified as living in temporary housing meet with the school Social Worker to identify immediate needs. The Social Worker also consults with parents and guardians to identify needs of students. The school purchases needed items as identified for individual students such as clothing, shoes, and school supplies. Literature and books are also purchased and provided to students that students in temporary housing themselves select according to their interests. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a Title I school for the 2017-18 school year. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  We are a Title I school for the 2017-18 school year. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title I school for the 2017-18 school year. 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. A Hiring Committee recruits, interviews and hires staff. Prospective candidates are engaged in instructional activities that help the school discern the teacher’s capacity and alignment to the CKMS instructional approach. Interview questions reflect an understanding of teacher best practices including the Danielson Framework, Common Core Learning Standards, meeting the needs of all students, beliefs about how student learn best, and assessment practices. High quality professional development is conducted on a weekly basis and is ongoing throughout the school year to support best practices. External PD opportunities are provided including workshops, professional learning, and intervisitations to other schools. Leadership capacity building is supported through a variety of methods including the delivery of professional development, opportunities to serve on committees (School Leadership Team, Professional Development committee, Instructional Cabinet), and coordinate program (after-school, ESL, Exchange structure components). Mentoring is provided to support new teachers. Intervisitations and learning walks are encouraged and scheduled. Teacher team meetings and collaborative planning sessions are scheduled into teacher programs daily. All teachers at CKMS hold Masters degrees. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). A Professional Development (PD) committee at the school develops a yearly plan for professional learning conducted on a weekly basis that is based on student and teacher needs. PD is aligned to the goals set out in this CEP document, according to the Framework for Great Schools put forth by the Chancellor. Workshops are developed and conducted by pedagogues, consultants, and the Principal on a rotating basis. Common Core Learning Standards are referred to and supported during PD sessions. The Quality Review and Danielson rubrics also serve as guides for the creation, implementation and evaluation of PD. The availability of the Borough Field Support Center PD is communicated and encouraged. Modifications, adjustments and adaptations to instruction are planned and delivered for Students with Disabilities and English language learners, as well as the use of paraprofessionals to support students. Lesson and unit planning and revision encourage CCLS best practices and strategies, monitoring the progress and review of student work to revise the process as needed. Curriculum is revised on an ongoing basis for alignment to CCLS, student achievement, and interdisciplinary connections. Student work is continually reviewed to ensure alignment to CCLS, as well as to modify practice in order to meet the needs of all students. Part 3: TA Schools Only 5  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Our school is a SWP Title I program 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Our school is a SWP Title I program Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A committee of teachers make decisions regarding the selection of assessments including Measures of Student Learning, as well as professional development (PD) to support the use of data. Teachers collaborate to identify the assessments that will be used during the school year and how data will be shared and utilized. Thus far, the school's data specialist has analyzed the data with the support of teachers and shared this user-friendly information through the school's Google Drive, so that all teachers and staff have access. The data specialist, key teachers and administrators review and provide support through professional development to understand and use the data. Teachers utilize this information to group students and tailor instruction. A survey is provided at the beginning of the school year to teachers to identify their professional development needs and interests. A PD committee develops a year-long plan with topics and cycles according to this information, which includes assessment and the use of data to tailor instruction. Teachers take leadership roles to develop relevant PD and present it to colleagues. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 6  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 128,530 1,825,076 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 7  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. City Knoll Middle school, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students City Knoll Middle School/02M933 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 9  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 0  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) City Knoll Middle School/02M933 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 1  ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: 2  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 3  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 2 School Name City Knoll Middle School Borough Manhattan School Number 933 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kaye Kerr Coach Sabrina Romano - ELA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Stephanie Lund Teacher/Subject Area Karen Myrie/Special Education Teacher/Subject Area Matthew Licari/Social Studies Related-Service Provider Rebeca Rubin Superintendent Bonnie Laboy Assistant Principal Alana Jermanok Coach Greg Hargreaves - Math School Counselor Sarah Mailman, Social Worker Parent Marlen Martinez parent of Noel Parent Coordinator Angelica Diaz Field Support Center Staff Member Paula Waldron Other (Name and Title) Alison Levine, Guidance C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 5  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 238 Total number of ELLs 24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.08% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 n/a n/a 0 7 n/a n/a 0 8 9 10 11 12 n/a n/a 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At City Knoll Middle School we used data from NYSESLAT and the previous year state tests in ELA and mathematics. Additionally, we administer the Performance Series for ELA and mathematics, as part of Measures of Student Learning (MOSL). We administer the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment three times a year and perform running records on students. The data gathered from the MOSLs, DRP, and from state exams allows us to plan accordingly for the blended model of push-in and pull-out free standing ESL program to allow for English language learning intervention methods that specifically cater to ELL needs. The data shows our students struggle with listening and writing, so supports to further writing skills are collaboratively developed by the ESL and content area teachers. The data also indicates that our long-term ELLs experience difficulty in unpacking concepts in content areas, so teachers support students through schema building activities that include the use of a variety of graphic organizers and contenxtualization activities. Field work also support students in making real 6  world connections to content. The school also uses Skedula/Pupil Path, an online grading system, to monitor student progress in each content area. Additionally, progress reports are provided in between report cards, 4 times per year and provide information regarding student's progress in each class. Report cards are percentage based by content areas. All student data is monitored for progress and adjustments made accordingly to instruction. Teachers also monitor progress qualitatively through teacher created rubrics. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The ELL service provider has common planning time with and co-teach our academic intervention class (free-standing ENL). In these classes, students are grouped according to their English level to provide targeted support and will meet four times per week in the 2017-18 school year. In order to ensure the materials the ELLs receive is not above or below their abilities, we specifically use the data from the Degrees of Reading Power Exam in order to group ELLs based on their individual reading levels. They have an allotted two periods a week to read independently and periodically have conferences with both their ELA and ENL teachers. This data is also used to modify ELL students' work. Depending on their level of reading, teachers adjust the texts they are reading in class to provide the ELLs with texts on their level. ENL teacher also meets with content area teachers either in-person or collaborate virtually to provide modifications and scaffolds for ELL student in the class. All staff members are provided with student assessment data through the shared Google drive. Teacher teams meet during Tuesday afternoon professional development time to review and analyze data (both formal assessment data and informal classroom data) and plan instruction and supports that is then used to support the ELL students in the class. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use NYSESLAT, Performance Series, and DRP data to evaluate the success of the programs for ELLs. The Performance Series is offered in Spanish for the mathematics test. Performance series and DRP are administered twice per year to assess students progress in mathematics and literacy skills. Data will be analyzed to determine if students have shown growth from the initial testing in the fall to the end of year testing in the spring. Progress will be measured by the number of students who have shown growth on the assessments and the amount of growth in each area assessed. Once the data has been gathered, the ELA and Math teacher both share the data on the school-wide drive for all pedagogues to access. These results are then used to group students/ provide intervention if necessary. The results of the most recent DRP indicate that our ELLs range from 2-5 grade levels below where they should be. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ESL teacher uses common planning time to review data and make curricular and instructional decisions. Additionally, the ESL teacher meets with grade-level teachers during professional work time and with the special education teachers once a month. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] CKMS uses data to guide instruction for ELLs with the help of the Response to Intervention framework’s three tiers of  instructional support. ELLs are not in a self-contained ESL classes for content, but instead they are with their native English speaking classmates.  For the process, we begin with the Core of Instruction for all students, but then give a “Double Dose” of Instruction for  differentiation and support. If our ELLs are still having difficulty, we then move onto Intensive Intervention where ELLs are pulled aside for small group and even individualized instruction during ESL push-in periods.   We utilize performance series and DRP data to group students for intervention. We regularly adjust these groupings based on in-class assessment data. In addition, assessment data gathered from informal classroom assessments is reviewed regularly in order to adjust lessons and plan next steps for individual and small groups of students within the academic intervention class sessions. The students who require further support than just the small group stand-alone instruction, are given more intervention supports from our certifed Wilson Just Words service provider, where the students who struggle beyond the support of the 7  ENL teacher are able to get more individualized instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As revealed by the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL proficiency results, it can be seen that the majority of our ELLs are at the Expanding or Commanding (Advanced and Proficient) levels. Also, student performance on the DRP, Performance Series, and ELA state assessment will be reviewed and used to determine the effectiveness of our ELL program. Our ELLs have yielded higher results in math than in ELA; because of this, we focus on those skills addressed in ELA class more so than the ones addressed in math class because of the data from the state exams. In the content classrooms, students are grouped based on their current performance level, as we have various newcomers with varying levels of proficiency in both math and ELA. In the stand-alone small group instruction, the ELLs are grouped based on their NYSESLAT scores. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Information will be disseminated during grade-level Common Planning Time (CPT), which are held once a week. In addition, data meetings will be held once a month during Tuesday afternoon professional development. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. CKMS offers Stand-Alone ENL and Integrated ENL classes. Our students that are identified as entering or emerging receive 180 minutes (4 periods) of stand-alone ENL per week and an additional 180 minutes (4 periods) of integrated ENL per week. Transitioning students receive 180 minutes (4 periods) of integrated ENL instruction per week, expanding students receive 180 minutes (4 periods) of integrated ENL instruction per week. During the stand-alone instructional time, students are grouped by grade and proficiency level. All ELL students who are identified with IEPs travel with one grade level class and all ELLs without IEPs travel with a different grade level class. The ENL teacher provides separate integrated support times to each group of students (ELLs with IEPs and ELLs without IEPs), as their schedules differ. In stand-alone instruction time, the teacher integrates all four language modalities during the week that are based on this academic text. The academic texts are chosen based on lexile levels. When ESL teacher goes into the classrooms to support ELLs in content classrooms, they begin by conferencing with content teachers virtually or in person in order to review the objective and its corresponding linguistic commands. They will usually work with a small group - either just the emerging students or a mix of the emerging and transitioning students as content instruction occurs. Whenever possible they have scaffolded texts or graphic organizers to assist students. Teachers provide vocabulary graphic organizers for students, model sentence starters and frames, and uses the students' home language if appropriate. ESL teachers employ several Marzano strategies for academic language acquisition. Whenever possible, students are paired up with native language buddies to support content and linguistic learning. b. TBE program. If applicable. Our school does not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. 8  Our school does not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ESL teachers work with the data specialist/STARS coordinator to ensure that instructional minutes are properly programmed based on students NYSESLAT proficiency level. ELLs that are entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding are placed in one class with general education students so that they receive integrated support services from the ESL teacher at the same time. If a student has an IEP that indicates he/she requires integrated co-teaching (ICT) classes, accommodations will be made so that the child also receives the required minutes of ESL support. Commanding students may or may not be placed in the class with the majority of our other ELLs. If they are not placed in that class, they will receive support through the academic intervention class. This school year, all 6th and 7th grade commanding ELLs are in classes with entitled ELLs. The 8th grade commanding ELLs receive two periods of small-group instruction a week, as per the mandates.Entering and Emerging students receive four periods of stand-alone English instruction and four periods of integrated English during content periods on a weekly basis. Some transitioning students receive two periods of integrated support in content area classes and two periods of stand-alone English and other transitioning students receive four integrated support periods a week. Expanding students receive four periods of integrated support in content area classes. Commanding students in the sixth and seventh grade receive two periods of integrated instruction a week. The eighth grade commanding students receive two periods of stand-alone instruction a week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in English. ESL teachers collaborate with content area teachers to provide instructional supports such as cooperative learning groups, language buddies, graphic organizers, and language acquisition strategies. They also find supplemental materials to integrate in the free-standing English class to support language and content. Some of the materials used are academic picture dictionaries, iPads with translation applications, bilingual dictionaries, science and mathematics textbooks are also available in Spanish. A series of professional development sessions are planned to support content teachers with ELLs in the classroom. CKMS is working with our Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) coach to develop classroom libraries that have academic texts in students home languages. The ENL teacher works directly every week with core content teachers and incorporates the content in those classes into the stand-alone periods. The guided reading rotates from focuses in ELA, social studies, science, and math (word problems). Teachers send the ENL teacher readings for the class. If the text is complex, the ENL teacher pre-teaches vocabulary or modifies the text and reads it with the students in the stand-alone period so that they understand what is going on during their content area class periods. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Any new Spanish speaking students receive the Spanish LAB assessment to assess their literacy in their home language. Each entering/emerging student receives an iPad that they bring from class to class throughout the day. They are to use these iPads in order to translate materials into their native language if necessary. Each iPad has Google translate app downloaded onto it; this app has a feature that allows the user to take a picture of a text and it automatically translates into their native language. The ENL room also has glossaries and dictionaries of all of the current languages of the school. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 9  a. When we receive any SIFE students, we employ more services through the support of the ESL teachers to intensify instruction to help students make up what they have missed due to prior years’  interruptions, but we would also provide the services of all the other pedagogues in the school who instruct the SIFE. The ESL department has already developed special materials designed to teach the alphabet and basic literacy to older children. Online language programs such as Duo Linguo and MobyMax could support accelerated language learning. Targeted literacy development through scaffolded instruction to address the student's need would be incorporated. b. At CKMS, we pair newcomer students on day one with a language buddy, who speaks the native language and translates. Translated materials are provided in all subject areas including art. The ESL teacher is Spanish speaking and further supports instruction, as well as the math teacher. Furthermore, translating applications are utilized on the iPad. Schema building supports and scaffold are collaboratively planned with content area teachers during teacher team meeting times and common planning. CKMS works with an organization called One to World that provides us with volunteer undergraduate, graduate, and Ph.D candidates from around the world. These volunteers tutor or students in their native language during after-school hours. c. The ELLs who have been receiving services for 4 to 6 years have already acquired interpersonal speaking skills; however, they still need a lot of support in orthography, literacy and writing. In addition, focus is made on addressing the issues that are preventing these students from achieving a score of Proficient on the NYSESLAT for them to leave the program, which usually has to do with unpacking concepts, so supports and scaffolds are collaboratively planned with teachers including graphic organizers and note- catchers, writing process supports and contextualization activities including video clips, visuals and manipulatives. d. Long-term ELLs at City Knoll are lacking the reading and writing skills necessary to pass the NYSESLAT and test out of ESL. Students are given focused intervention on reading and writing to help them eventually test out. Our LTEs students are also SWD, thus more scaffolding and modification of instruction is necessary to help these students eventually leave the program. ESL teachers work with special educators and speech providers to provide targeted reading and writing instruction. e. Former ELLs have been able to test out of the ESL program; however, due to persistent language mistakes, former ELLs need targeted intervention. This might include literacy focus and also developing better writing skills. In addition, former ELLs for up to two years after testing out of ESL, are allowed extended time on all state exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs already modify instruction to accommodate each student’s individual needs as specified in their  IEPs. In math, we use EngageNY curriculum which offers materials in Spanish and Arabic. Math teachers also use visuals and manipulatives in their instruction which further develops content area knowledge for ELLs. In ELA, we are using the NYS recommended curriculum provided by Expeditionary Learning. Social Studies has created their own curriculum uses Passport and also incorporates supplementary texts in a variety of mediums and modalities including video clips, maps, and handouts. Content area teachers have been trained in how to elevate texts to support language acquisition. ESL teachers use sheltered instruction in ESL class and make modifications to both curricula in order to cater to the language needs of ELLs and students with disabilities. They modify worksheets and handouts for students so they have simplified language, are easy to read, and include graphic organizers when applicable. Sentence starters and sentence structures are also given to outline the information and teach and develop organization techniques that aid in comprehension. Since ELLs are required to read the same texts, they are given visuals, audiobooks, graphic novel versions, and any other visual or auditory supports available. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We meet the needs of all SWDs by providing the different services required. Each student’s schedule for services is coordinated to maximize instructional time in core content classes. In order to place these students in the appropriate setting, we first look at NYSESLAT scores, NYS test scores, and grades from sending schools. We then look at their IEPs to see which setting of the least restrictive environment has been mandated for each respective student. Should the IEPs  list another type of setting such as General Education or Self-Contained (12-1-1), then we would program the student's schedule such that we are meeting the requirements as stated on their IEPs and help foster English acquisition. 0  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention for ELA, social studies, math and science occurs during a self-contained 45 minute intervenetion block that meets four times a week, which is targeted toward Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ELLs. In addition, the special educators meet with ELL SWDs for SETTS and our speech provider supports ELLs that require such services. Special educators also co-teaches ICT classes for all content areas. Integrated/push-in support is provided throughout the week in content area classes for targeted interventions. Interventions occur during class time in all subject areas including ELA, math, social studies and science in small strategic groups using differentiated strategies according to the needs of students identified by teachers, as well as data from Performance Series for ELA and math, DRP, and NYC performance tasks for social studies and science. Item analysis data from NYS ELA and math scores are also utilized to identify and support student needs. Data from student work on IXL and Mobymax, Common Core Learning Standards aligned software programa provided to students by the school in ELA and math is also utilized. In ELA targeted interventions include guided reading groups to support literacy development, as well as specific skill strategies and supports as need and identified by the data analysis. The ESL teachers work with the special education instructors as well as the content area teachers to collaboratively create appropriate interventions for ELLs.   9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year of 2017-18, our Spanish teacher who is also certified in ESL will become the full time ESL teacher, thus able to provide more supports for our ELLs. Additionally, our art teacher, Jessie Fass, is currently enrolled in an ESL certification program. We will also be offering morning orientations for each grade the week before school begins. This gives students an opportunity to engage in community building activities with each other, meet teachers, and get to know the school building. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, there are no programs or services that will be discontinued.   11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs at CKMS are afforded equal access to all school programs. They are enrolled in the same academic programs as  their peers based on their assessments and data. CKMS has an after school program that is run by Manhattan Youth. Students enrolled in after-school program are given a meal and have the option to participate in one or two sessions. After school, students can take such classes as fencing, coding, guitar, soccer, track, basketball, fashion, and more. Additionally, Monday-Friday the program offers a Study Lab during both sessions, so students are able to complete homework with assistance from teachers. City Knoll will continue to use volunteers from the One to World organization to offer tutoring to ELLs in their native language. During the mandated, individual, annual parent/student meetings ESL teachers hold to review progress and set goals, families are informed of the school programs offered to ELLs. If necessary, interpretation services of the Office of Translation and Interpretation are used. The student and family handbook will be translated into all 8 DOE languages and the school's mission is also translated and posted in the main office for all families to see. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ESL instruction at City Knoll Middle School entails the most recent and effective pedagogical techniques. Instruction is given using varied language acquisition methods such as visuals and manipulatives, Total Physical Response (TPR), technology, authentic materials, and graphic organizers for scaffolded writing. Technology used in the classroom includes the Promethean Boards and Elmo Document Camera to aid and support in direct instruction, as well as iPad apps for translation. All students are given a City Knoll email account and given lessons and opportunities to practice digital citzenship. The school currently has 2 Lenovo carts, a mac book cart, two Chromebook carts, and 2 iPad carts. The school also dedicates 15 iPads just for ELLs for translation purposes. Computers are also available to students for work in all content areas. Instructional materials are similar for all subgroups of ELLs; native language materials such as translated texts are available for beginner students. Leveled texts are also available for each subgroup, depending on their reading and English language proficiency level. We also have several academic picture dictionaries on hand and bilingual dictionaries.   1  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Bilingual dictionaries are available for students. Several staff members in the building including the ESL teacher, principal, a math teacher, and parent coordinator also speak Spanish. In addition, translated texts in Spanish are available for students when available. Texts are given to our beginning student in English and Spanish when available, CMP3 Math, ELA books and reading material, and science textbook and support materials. Our MSQI coach is working on building classroom libraries that have content area texts in a variety of languages. When our school provides a TBE or Dual language program additional native language materials would be provided and appropriate pedagogues would be assigned in the language of the program.   14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At City Knoll Middle School, students are transitioning from elementary school where they only had one teacher for all subjects and remained in the same room. In 6th grade, they must adapt to having specialized teachers for each content area and traveling from room to room. All support and resources are grade appropriate for the middle school level. All resources and materials available correspond to middle school (11-13 year olds) interests. Texts may be leveled at grades below their current grade level; however, the material is still age appropriate regardless of lexile level. In addition, City Knoll Middle School includes a structure called Exchange Team, which is essentially an advisory period where the Exchange Team Adult Leader loops with students throughout their middle school experience and supports their social-emotional well being. The Exchange Team Adult Leader communicates with families on a monthly basis, acting as liaison between school and family, as well as an advocate for the student. Topics discussed during Exchange Team include age appropriate material, academic achievement, and community building. The curriculum utilized is MindUp, focused on mindfulness and brain theory. All curricular materials (ELA, math, social studies and science) are NYC Core Curriculum for the specific grade level and therefore are appropriate for ELLs age levels and grade.   15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share the building with another school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). City Knoll MS also will offer an orientation for all students by grade-level before the prior school year ends, where students will engage in community building activities with each other, meet teachers, and get to know the school building. New ELLs who enroll throughout the school year will be placed into the ESL teacher's 45 minute self-contained classroom for language and cultural support, as well as the classes that receives integrated services. For new incoming students, the ESL teacher, the ESL teacher will invite ELLs into a weekly lunch group that meets to support new ELLs through casual conversation to promote speaking and listening. Even though the lunch group is specified for ELLs, all students are welcome to participate. All newly enrolled students, including ELLs are also buddied with another student to orient and support lessons and learning. All ELLs are invited to participate in the after-school program offered by Manhattan Youth. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently offer Spanish to ELLs and all students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program at this time. 2  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ESL teacher, Ms. Taegel, is scheduled to attend several workshops and training sessions throughout the school year  regarding ELLs and providing appropriate support to students and parents alike. Also, CKMS utilizes several approaches recommended by the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI), which focuses on literacy development for middle school students including the use of Word Generation program and guided reading strategies. There has been and will be continuous professional development on implementing the vocabulary focused program that crosses all content areas called Word Generation. At CKMS, we also have weekly professional development activities as called for by the UFT Teachers contract. The weekly meetings include data assessment, how to make necessary modifications and differentiation techniques for ELLs and students with disabilities. The ESL teacher provides at least one professional development each month to train teachers of ELLs on language acquisition strategies. Professional development topics include: October: schema building through the use of graphic organizers, November: cooperative learning structures, December: scaffolding appraoches and materials, January: questioning and discussion techniques, February: technology to support language acquisition, March: test sophistication strategies for ELLs, April: Disciplinary Literacy, May: think-alouds to improve comprehension and metacognition, among others. Content area specialists provide workshops throughout the year to support literacy development in the content area. The Social Worker (currently CKMS does not have a guidance counselor) provides ongoing workshops throughout the school year to support students' social-emotional development and well-being. The secretary participates in Network supported workshops on the use of ATS, cummulative record keeping, student enrollment, interacting with community based organization and time keeping. At this time the school does not employ an assistant principal. The Common Core Learning Standards are an integral part in curriculum development, and teachers at CKMS are well-versed at aligning standards and developing learning targets in all lessons. Standards are attached to all assignments that enter the gradebook in the DataCation Skedula grading system. Interim Progress Reports provided in between Report Cards are common core standards based and provide a snapshot of where student mastery resides throughout the school year. A professional development plan was developed by a committee of teachers, Social Worker and the Principal that rotates presentation of relevant topics identified by teachers and according to the needs. In addition, teachers offer support to one another in the form of professional development presentations of best practice strategies and intervisitation and debriefs. Some teachers act as mentors to offer support, instructional resources, and model instruction. All pedagogues sign-up and schedule at least one professional development workshop that they present during the year on best practices in the classroom. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ESL teacher is a member of the professional development committee. In order to meet the 15% of total hours for all teachers, she gives five professional development sessions to all staff. Previous topics have been: writing language objectives, modifying and scaffolding materials, understanding performance language objectives, cooperative learning activities, and discussion strategies. CKMS gives a survey at the beginning of the year to staff to identify professional development topics. Teachers provide input on what they specifically would like to learn more about. This includes specific ESL topics and strategies. The professional development schedule is agreed upon by the committee and the calendar is maintained on the school's shared Google Drive. Additionally any resources shared and presented to staff by the ESL teacher are also located on the drive. Attendance is taken at all professional development meetings and is stored in the main office. In order to meet the 50% of total hours for ENL teachers, we will have our ENL teacher participate in off-site PD through the UFT and field support center on the following topics: language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English 3  language learners. As she completes these sessions, she will send a summary to the principal as well as any other supporting documents. She will then disseminate this information as needed to grade-level teams, content area teams, or whole staff. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ESL teacher performs outreach with parents of ELLs and uses the NYC DOE language line as necessary. During the first quarter, she schedules a meeting with all parents of ELLs and ELLs to review NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results, and set personal goals for students. She has parents sign off on all goals the students set. During the meetings the principal, parent coordinator, or community assistant, make themselves available for Spanish translation. If other translation services are needed, the NYC DOE language line is utilized. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our Parent Teacher Association meets monthly. We also offer monthly workshops on a variety of topics such as Common Core Learning Standards, DataCation/Skedula/PupilPath - our online grading system that teachers, students and families have access to, Connected Math Curriculum, and emotional support for middle schoolers. All these opportunities for parent involvement allow for parents of ELLs and parents of non-ELLs to foster relationships. We reach out to all parents consistently and send out a monthly newsletter to communicate information. In addition the school maintains a website in addition to the DOE portal that provides up to date information about the school. Full translation is available in all languages at all school events through the translation unit, and at parent teacher conferences, which are conducted as student led conferences. The PTA plans activities to involve parents in fundraising, events and celebrations that encourage families to participate in the school community.  The parent coordinator also plans to organize ESL classes for parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kaye Kerr, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: City Knoll Middle School School DBN: 02M933 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kaye Kerr Title Principal Alana Jermanok Assistant Principal Angelica Diaz Parent Coordinator Stephanie Lund ENL/Bilingual Teacher Marlen Martinez Parent Matthew Licari Teacher/Subject Area Karen Myrie Teacher/Subject Area Sabrina Ramano Greg Hargreaves Coach Coach Sara Mailman School Counselor Bonnie Laboy Paula Waldron Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Manhattan Rebeca Rubin Other Speech Provider Alison Levine Other Guidance Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 06/16/17 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 02M933 School Name: City Knoll Middle School Superintendent: Bonnie Laboy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Angelica Martha Diaz Tueros Parent Coordinator Community Worker No No YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. City Knoll Middle School uses Emergency Contact Cards to determine the language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Information to this end is also taken from the Home language survey, and ATS. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The languages we have identified include English, Spanish, Arabic, Chinese. A report is created and updated regularly with the languages that parents speak, by class and grade. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Families Newsletters are provided on the first of each month Monthly October - June parent-teacher conference announcements are provided multiple times around the 3 parent teacher conference dates (PTCs in November, March and May), after-school program information is provided on an ongoing basis throughout the school year as new offerings are provided, NYS testing information is provided in the spring, communications from the school are provided on a weekly basis. The school utilizes in house translators for Spanish speakers and reaches out to the translation unit for Chinese and Arabic familes. A calendar of events is distributed with the montly newsletter, so that families are aware of upcoming activities. All school holidays are printed in the Student and Family handbook which is distributed on the first day of school and acknowledged with a signature by student and guardians. The handbook is also available on the school's website. 8  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent conferences as requested on an ongoing basis. Student led conferences twice per year in November and March. Curriculum Night is conducted in September. Workshops for parents are provided throughout the schoolyear on a monthly basis. Social worker call families regarding absences and attendance on a daily basis. Advisory teachers (Exchange Team Adult Leaders) call families on a monthly basis. PTA meetings are held monthly. Family events are held throughout the school year IEP meetings. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School staff that speak the language are utilized to do automated calls through ATS based on home language flags. For Languages not spoken by school staff, families will be contacted using translation services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members are informed of phone and document translation services provided by the department of education via digital resources and staff meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 9  As mentioned, the school utilizes the available translated materials provided by the DOE for families whenever possible. The school takes advantage of the Language and Translation Unit as needed via phone and for written communication. All communication with families is translated into Spanish on-site. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school conducts surveys twice yearly with all school constituencies that provides the school with feedback on all aspects of the school community including communication and the availability of interpretation. The PTA also conducts surveys and polls families on how the school can improve - this information is shared with the school. One of the school's core values is communication, so this is an important belief and is fostered. We plan to use community volunteers and the DOE translation unit to translate our annual school surveys. 0 
