 24Q028 School Name: P.S. 28 - THE THOMAS EMANUEL EARLY CHILDHOOD CENTER Principal: ROBERT QUINTANA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Thomas Emanuel Early Childhood Center 342400010028 Pre-K to 2 School Number (DBN): 24Q028 109-10 47 th Avenue Corona NY 11368 (718) 271-4971 (718) 271-2576 Phone Number: Fax: Robert Quintana, I.A. rquinta2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Email Address: Robert Quintana, I.A. Ann Marie Schuh PilarPena Joan Miceli Monica Bunay Not Applicable Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Not Applicable District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Madelene Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50 th Avenue Corona New York 11368 MChan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-592-3357 Phone Number: 718-592-3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North Queens New York 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Robert Quintana, I.A. Ann Marie Schuh Tarcila Pena Kristin Kacher Monica Bunay Joan Miceli Carol Cardi Isabella Zoumboulis Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher/Chairperson Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Monica Bunay Graciela Juarez Francisca Garcia Sonia Solis Edith Pena Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? It is our wish to establish a safe and nurturing environment, one that stimulates and encourages learning, where activities that are developmentally appropriate for primary age youngsters are utilized effectively to ensure success and learning. We will strive to achieve this vision through employing successful early childhood practices with a strong commitment to high student expectations and achievement. By integrating all curriculum areas into solid balanced literacy and math program, all students will be provided with the skills and tools necessary to not only succeed in meeting city and state standards, but also to succeed in living life to the fullest.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 28- The Thomas Emanuel Early Childhood Center, a Pre-Kindergarten to Grade 2 school, located in the Corona section of Queens, New York, values and is committed to establishing a safe, nurturing, developmentally appropriate environment which implements best early childhood practices aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. P.S. 28 has a student population that is 65% English Language Learners. Our young students, who are from diverse backgrounds and abilities, come to school eager to learn. We understand the importance of giving these students a print rich environment and many opportunities for experiential learning which will build their background knowledge, resulting in high academic achievement that meets or exceeds standards in all core subjects. P.S. 28 teachers and school leaders share a common vision for high quality, rigorous instruction and high student achievement. We encourage collaboration among the teacher, curriculum specialists, teaching artists and cultural institutions to provide a comprehensive educational program for our young students. Teachers provide continual opportunities for students to use their imagination, creativity and inventive minds to explore all curriculum areas as a source of lifelong learning. P.S. 28 enjoys collaborations with several community based organizations including the Hall of Science, Queens Zoo, Queens Museum , Swim for Life, and Cool Culture. These organizations provide our students with rich experiences that reinforce the curriculum, as well as help them gain an understanding of their own culture, as well as the culture of others. P.S. 28 has a comprehensive Arts program. We have partnered with Puppetry in Practice, an early childhood program, which uses puppetry and the arts to further language development for all our young students, especially our students that are English Language Learners. Students’ talent in the visual arts is showcased yearly at our Annual Art Show. Students’ art work has been exhibited in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and more recently at the Queens Museum and Queens Borough Arts Festival. Students shine musically during our annual Concerts. P.S. 28 continues with its technology initiative which includes upgraded smart boards in the classroom, extensive use of iPads by both teachers and students and the use of Kindle Fires by students in this upcoming school year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 28 has 65% English Language Learners and 22% Students with Disabilities. Speech- Language delays are noted on our young students Individualized Education Plans. For both, Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners the need is for language and vocabulary development. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  Rigorous Instruction, an element of the Framework for Great Schools, is an area where we have made great progress this year. This was evident as seen in the School Quality Guide where 100% of teachers responded positively to questions about Rigorous Instruction in the area of Mathematics resulting in a 4% increase over the City average. We were successful in our goal of improving student learning in Mathematics as seen by a 21% increase in the number of students who reached proficiency level in the End of Year Measurement of Student Learning Mathematics Performance Task in Grades K-2. We also experienced success in our goal of improving student learning in Writing as evidenced by a 21% increase in the number of students who reached proficiency level in Writing as measured by the End of Year Measurement of Student Learning ELA Performance Task in Grades K-2. One key area of focus for this school year will be to introduce digital reading to the students through the use of Kindle Fires, with the goal of improving student independent reading passage fluency. We will also continue to focus on Writing instruction, using the program Being a Writer, to improve student writing skills. Additionally, there will be a focus on formative assessment, specifically teacher improvement in giving effective feedback to students to further their learning. We will continue to provide teachers opportunities to share in distributive leadership roles in our school community which will lead to professional growth and improved teacher practice ensuring our students will be college and career ready. We plan on further supporting parents in the area of Parent Involvement by encouraging and providing parents increased opportunities to volunteer at school wide events and functions held in the classroom. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q028 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 507 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 50 50 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 22 2 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 80.9% % Reduced Lunch 64.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 91.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.1 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 53 52 94.9% 1.2% 21.5% 0.0% 6.9% 0.6% 2 0% 7.8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the 2018 End of Year Measurement of Student Learning English Language Arts Performance Task indicated that 75% of K-2 students were proficient in the area of Writing, an increase of 21% over the prior year. This increase is attributed to the new writing program, Being a Writer, which was implemented this year in Grades K-2. This program brought together the latest research in teaching writing while supporting the students' social and ethical development, creating a classroom writing community where students feel empowered, supported in taking risks, and responsible to themselves and the group. Based upon this data, a priority need has been identified to continue to focus on the area of Writing to further develop students' skills in order to increase the number of students who are proficient in Writing in Grades K-2. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of Kindergarten to Grade 2 students will demonstrate proficiency in the area of Writing as measured by the End of Year Measure of Student Learning English Language Arts Performance Task. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will administer and collect a beginning writing sample from each student within the first ten days. Teacher teams will meet to analyze beginning writing sample to identify student needs, trends across the classroom and the grade. K-2 Classroom Teachers, ENL Teachers September-October 2018 Teachers will attend professional development to norm the administration and scoring of the Beginning of the Year Measure of Student Learning English Language Arts Performance Task. K-2 Classroom Teachers September - October 2018 Classroom Teachers, ENL Teachers, Assistant Principal Classroom Teachers, Rti Teacher, Assistant Principal K-2 Students September - Classroom Teachers October 2018 October- November 2018 November 2018-May 2019 October 2018- May 2019 Classroom Teachers Classroom Teachers Classroom Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers will administer and score the Beginning of the Year Measure of Student Learning English Language Arts Performance Task. Teacher Teams will meet to analyze Beginning of the Year Measure of Student Learning English Language Arts Performance Task data to determine students' needs and align results with Being a Writer program. K-2 Classroom Teachers Teacher Teams will meet monthly to analyze student writing, look for trends across the grade, discuss strategies/best practices and identify student need. K-2 Classroom Teachers Teachers will be observed teaching Writing with a focus on a supportive student environment. Individual feedback will be given to the teacher following the observation. Next steps will be discussed and further professional development will be determined based on teacher need. K-2 Classroom Teachers Teachers will administer a mid-year Measures of Student Learning English Language Arts Performance Task to all K-2 students to assess student progress in Writing. Teachers will meet to analyze assessment results to determine if student progress is being met and discuss next steps needed for student achievement. K-2 students, Classroom Teachers February 2019 Classroom Teachers, Assistant Principal Professional Development will be given to teachers on an on-going basis to support the program Being A Writer and best practices for teaching writing. K-2 Classroom Teachers November 2018- June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Assistant Principal 4 Teachers will attend professional development to norm the administration of the End of Year Measure of Student Learning English Language Arts Performance Task. Teachers will administer the Measure of Student Learning End of Year English Language Arts Performance Task. Results will be analyzed to determine if goal was met. K-2 Classroom Teachers K- 2 Students, Classroom Teachers May/June 2019 May/June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Assistant Principal Classroom Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops will be given by classroom teachers during weekly Parent Engagement Tuesday afternoons on how to help their child at home and offer individual support to parents as needed. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. iPads for Being a Writer Assessments Per diem- Professional Development Monday afternoon - Professional Development Tuesday afternoon - Parent Engagement, Teacher Team meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of Kindergarten-Grade 2 students will demonstrate proficiency in the area of Writing as measured by the mid-year Measure of Student Learning English Language Arts Performance Task. 5  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Measure of Student Learning English Language Arts Performance Task Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? An analysis of the 2018 easyCBM universal literacy screener (a timed assessment) indicates that 34% of Grade 1-2 students demonstrate low to no risk in passage reading fluency. A priority need has been identified to improve students' passage reading fluency by introducing digital reading to students through the use of Kindle Fires, allowing students to have easy access to reading materials and providing the necessary time for students to practice their reading skills both in school and at home. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 55% Grade 1-2 students will demonstrate low to no risk in passage reading fluency as measured by the universal literacy screener easyCBM. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A committee of teachers will establish the school wide policies and procedures for the use of Kindle Fires both in school and at home. Classroom Teachers September 2018 Classroom Teachers, Assistant Principal, A committee of teachers will be responsible for reviewing and suggesting content (e-reader, APP) for the Kindle Fires using Amazon Whispercast. Classroom Teachers September 2018 Students will be assessed in the Fall and Winter in literacy using the universal screener easyCBM. Grade 1-2 students Grade level teacher teams will meet to analyze easyCBM results, after each assessment, to identify student needs, and trends across the classroom and grade, in order to inform literacy instruction, with an emphasis on passage reading fluency. Grade 1-2 Classroom Teachers, September 2018, February 2019 October 2018, March, June 2019 Response to Intervention teachers CUNY Technology Intern Classroom Teachers, Assistant Principal, CUNY Technology Intern Response to Intervention teachers Grade 1-2 Classroom Teachers, Response to Intervention Teachers, Assistant Principal Parent Workshops will be held for the distribution of Kindle Fires. Parents will be informed of the policies and procedures of tablet use and will assume responsibility for the device for the entire school year. Grade 1-2 Parents November 2018 Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, CUNY Technology Intern Assistant Principal, CUNY Technology Intern Assistant Principal Teachers will be informed about the school wide policies and procedures for using Kindle Fires in the classroom and at home. Classroom Teachers November 2018 Teacher teams will meet monthly to discuss best practices in how to motivate and increase student focused independent reading time in the classroom and at home, with the goal of increasing passage reading fluency, using the Kindle Fires. Teachers will develop student reading logs to account for print and digital reading. Grade 1-2 Classroom Teachers November 2018- June 2019 Students will be assessed using easyCBM . Passage reading fluency results will be analyzed to determine if this goal was met. Grades 1-2 students, Response to June 2019 Response to Intervention 8  Intervention teachers teacher, Assistant Principal, Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Kindle Fires will be distributed to parents, for student use, at a parent workshop, conducted by the Parent Coordinator, CUNY Technology Intern and Assistant Principal, with translation, on how to operate the Kindle Fire, and the policies and procedures for student use of this tablet for the school year. Teachers will also hold parent workshops during Tuesday Parent Engagement on best practices for student independent reading at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. CUNY Technology Intern Easy CBM Universal Screener Parent Coordinator Response to Intervention Teacher Monday -professional development Tuesday teacher team meetings Tuesday Parent Engagement Amazon Whispercast - E-readers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 9  By February 2019, 35% of Grade 1-2 students will demonstrate low to no risk in passage reading fluency as measured by the mid-year (Winter) universal literacy screener easyCBM. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. easyCBM Universal Literacy Screener Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of the 2017-2018 Measurement of Teacher Practice indicated that teachers experienced the lowest rating in component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction with 64% of the teachers demonstrating Highly Effective practice. Upon further analysis, it was determined that a focus on feedback to students that further their learning is necessary for teachers to improve in this component. A priority need has been identified to focus on giving teacher the support they need to give effective feedback to students that will increase student achievement across all subjects. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all Kindergarten through Grade 2 teachers will participate in learning communities focused on assessment: how to give effective feedback to students to further student learning, as measured by 70% of Kindergarten through Grade 2 teachers demonstrating Highly Effective practice in the Measure of Teacher Practice component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will participate in three cycles of Professional Learning where they will learn how to give effective feedback to students to further student learning as a part of formative assessment. Teachers will read and discuss the book, How to Give Effective Feedback to Your Students by Susan M. Brookhart. Teachers will share their learning with teachers in their Professional Learning Community. Teacher feedback from classroom observations focusing on effective student feedback (3d: Using Assessment in Instruction) will be used to determine if further differentiated professional learning is needed. Teachers will share their expertise with their colleagues through intervisitations. Teacher observations will be reviewed to determine if the goal of 70% of teachers have demonstrated Highly Effective practice in the Measure of Teacher Practice component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? November 2018 - June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New Language Teachers, Assistant Principal November 2018 -June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New Language Teachers November 2018-May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New Language Teachers Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New Language Teachers Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New Language Teachers Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New Language Teachers 2  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be held by teachers during Tuesday Parent Engagement to inform parents about the curriculum and show parents how they can support their child at home in reading, writing and math. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Book - How to Give Effective Feedback to Your Students by Susan M. Brookhart Monday - Professional Learning Communities Tuesday - Parent Engagement Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will evaluate if 45% of teachers have been rated Highly Effective in the Measure of Teacher Practice component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction as evidenced by classroom observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Measure of Teacher Practice Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers have indicated through conversations with administrators both informal and at the initial planning and end of year conferences, that more teachers would like to accept a distributive leadership role in the school. Teachers have grown and developed professionally as they have attended outside professional development and have demonstrated expertise in different areas. A priority need has been identified to increase the number of teachers who will share in distributive leadership roles to improve teacher practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of teachers will share in distributive leadership roles to grow professionally and improve their practice by participating in both inside and outside professional development sessions and turn-keying their learning to colleagues during grade level meetings as evidenced by Teacher Team meeting sign-in sheets, teacher reflections and classroom observations. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development will be provided to staff explaining the expectations for Teacher Team work focusing on distributive leadership responsibilities and professional development opportunities for the 2018-2019 school year. Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New LanguageTeachers September/October Principal and 2018 Assistant Principal Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, September/October 2018 Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New Language Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principal September 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principal October 2018 – June 2019 TEQ Staff Developer, Assistant Principal May/June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers will work collaboratively designing a reflection sheet" that will be completed by teacher after attending a professional development session highlighting what was learned, and how and when will the learning be used. Teachers will participate in the C4All (Computer for All) initiative Cohort 2. Teachers will share their learning with colleagues along with agenda, handouts, sign-in sheet, invitation for inter-visitation. English as a New Language Teachers Kindergarten Teacher, English as a New Language Teacher, Library/Media Teacher Teachers will pilot Nearpod, an interactive classroom tool for teachers to engage students with interactive lessons, in the classroom. Teacher will share their learning with colleagues through inter-visitations and individual support. Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New Language Teacher Teachers will participate in professional development sessions on how to improve teacher practice by integrating technology into their lessons. During each session, teachers will write a reflection highlighting what they have learned, how and when they will use what they have learned in the classroom and what, if any, additional support or follow-up they might need. Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New Language Teachers Teacher reflection sheets and teacher observations will be reviewed and evaluated to determine if this goal has been met. Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, English as a New 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Language Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will provide parent workshops during Tuesday Parent Engagement on how parents can use technology to support their child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Nearpod software site license TEQ Staff Developer Per diem - outside professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 45% of teachers will have shared in distributive leadership roles to improve teacher practice as evidenced by Teacher Reflection Sheets, Teacher Team meeting sign-in sheets and classroom observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher Reflection Sheets, Teacher Team meeting sign-in sheets, observations (Advance) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 87% of parents responded positively to questions about Parent Involvement in the School which was 6% below the city average. This indicator was the lowest under Strong Family and Community Ties, with the other indicators receiving positive scores of over 90%. Upon further analysis, it was revealed that this lower score was due to only 66% of the parents responding favorably to having an opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. A priority need has been identified for the school community to increase opportunities for all parents to volunteer time to support their school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent involvement will increase to 93% by offering parents increased opportunities to volunteer time to support their school as measured by the Strong Family-Community Ties positive responses on the the School Quality Guide. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A parent committee will be formed to communicate and organize volunteer opportunities for parents to participate in school wide and in the classroom. Pre-K to Grade 2 Parents September 2018 Parent Coordinator SLT Parent Members A survey will be sent home for parents to indicate time, availability and interest in volunteering at school wide and classroom events. Parents Pre-K - 2 Pre-K- Kindergarten September 2018 Parent Volunteer Committee Parents Parent Coordinator A calendar (translated) of school wide events will be distributed for parent volunteers to sign-up. Pre-K – Grade 2 September 2018 Parent Volunteer Committee The parent volunteer committee will collect, organize and establish a data base of parent responses. The committee will inform the parent and the school of the name of the person and event the person has been assigned to. Teachers will provide parents with a minimum of two opportunities per semester to volunteer in the classroom. Parents Pre-K – Grade 2 Parents Classroom Teachers October 2018– June 2019 October 2018– June 2019 Parent Coordinator Parent Volunteer Committee Parent Coordinator Classroom Teachers Parent Volunteer Committee Parent Coordinator Parent surveys and evaluations will be distributed, collected and analyzed by the Parent Volunteer Committee to determine if parents feel their has been an increase of opportunities to volunteer time to support the school. Pre-K – Grade 2 Parents December 2018 Parent Volunteer Committee March 2019 Parent Coordinator The School Quality Guide, Strong Family Ties - Parent Involvement section will be analyzed to determine if the goal has been met. Pre -K- Grade 2 Parents June 2019 June 2019 Parent Volunteer Committee Parent Coordinator Principal Assistant Principal 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Continue and expand our partnerships with the Hall of Science, Queens Museum, Cool Culture Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School Messenger Cool Culture Queens Museum Parent Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, attendance sheets and in-house parent surveys will be analyzed to determine if 70% of parents have had the opportunity to volunteer their time to support the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets, in house surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Phonics Program: Fundations, Recipe for Reading, Letter People are programs used as interventions for letter names, letter sounds. Fluency: Great Leaps is used as an intervention for word and passage reading fluency. Comprehension: Engage Literacy is used as an intervention for reading comprehension. Go Math Remediation Hands-On Activities N/A N/A Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small groups – 3-5 students Service is provided 3-5 days per week during the school day for 30-50 minutes each session. Small group instruction Math Centers Service is provided 2-3X a week during Enrichment/Intervention period N/A N/A N/A N/A Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) easyCBM, universal literacy screener, is administered to all students in Grades K-2 three times per year. Students who fall below the 20 th percentile (norm referenced) on this test receive intervention support. Mathematics Go Math Assessments N/A N/A Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who demonstrate behavioral, social or emotional issues Play therapy is used that is specifically designed to meet Small group, one-to-one Service is provided during the school day. 0  that affect student achievement. the need of the student. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 21 students P.S. 28 is dedicated to delivering an academically rigorous and emotionally nurturing program to all early childhood students while addressing the specific needs of the Students in Temporary Housing. Highly qualified teachers, appropriate guidance and support,and after school Title III/Immigrant programs are provided. Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor provide parent outreach and facilitate parent support meetings. Supplies are distributed to students as needed(backpacks, pencils, books, etc.). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a Title I school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  We are a Title I school 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title I school 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Highly Qualified Teachers are actively recruited through NYC Teacher Finder and through the Office of Teacher Recruitment. Teachers are given assignments in their license areas. Teachers who are not highly qualified are given the opportunity to take outside coursework that will ensure that they meet the requirements for highly qualified. New teachers receive mentoring and on-going support from experienced teachers on the grade as well as school administrators. All teachers receive high quality professional development aligned to CCLS as well as to the Danielson framework weekly. Teachers collaborate with their grade weekly at team meetings. All teachers are provided ongoing feedback to improve their teacher practice as a result of informal and formal observations. At this current time, instruction is provided by a staff that is 100% highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development, designed to ensure that all teachers are prepared to help students meet the Common Core State Standards, is provided to the staff weekly by the Principal, Assistant Principal and Teacher Leaders. Teachers and paraprofessionals are provided differentiated learning opportunities. These are given to the teachers based on teacher need and interest as well as a result of teacher feedback from informal and formal observations. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The Pre-K Social Worker visits bi-monthly to provide support to both staff and parents. Pre-K students are invited to Kindergarten orientation sessions. Guidance is given to families on how best to prepare their child for kindergarten. Parents receive personalized worksheets for their child to practice name writing and counting numbers. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers play an active role in the design of formative and summative assessments as well as in the decision-making process regarding the use and selection of appropriate grade level and school wide assessments. Teachers work collaboratively with their grade level colleagues to design and pilot assessments. Teachers meet to provide feedback on how useful the assessment was in providing information about student learning and achievement. Once an assessment is adopted by the school, professional development is conducted for the staff on how to administer the test, norm the grading and use the results to determine student growth or to inform and improve instruction. Teachers also receive professional development on component 3d: Using Assessment in Instruction from the Danielson framework. A school-wide assessment calendar is used to ensure that all assessments are given in a timely manner. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 5  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 271784 36052 41550 0 3458826 X X X Section 5A, 5B, 5C ,5D, 5E Title III Supplemental Program Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 6  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 28, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 28 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● offering Parent Workshops to provide them with the training they need to work with their children to improve their achievement level. Workshops include but are not limited to: Child Development and Cognitive Development, Positive Parenting Skills, How to Help Your Child with Homework, Nutrition Workshops, Technology Workshops, Bullying Workshop, Cool Culture Enrollment and information sessions, Instructional Expectations information sessions, and orientation sessions. Parent workshops are presented by the parent coordinator, teachers, school social worker, guidance counselor and community based resource staff members. ● providing parents with the training and information they need to effectively become involved in the planning and decision making in support of the education of their children through the activities of the School Leadership Team and Parent Association. All letters and notices are translated into the primary languages and translators are available at all meetings and workshops. A newsletter, Home-School Connection, is sent home monthly in both English and Spanish. This newsletter provides parents with practical ideas that promote school success, parent involvement, and more effective parenting. In June and September there are Pre-Kindergarten and Kindergarten orientations. Additionally, an 8  Enrichment newsletter, produced jointly by the cluster teachers, is distributed monthly. This newsletter features the topics learned and lessons given in Art, Physical Education, Science, Library/Technology and Music. ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress by providing parents with Progress Reports three times a year in addition to School Report Cards which are distributed at the end of each trimester. Monthly school calendars are sent home to keep parents abreast of workshops and school events. The Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker help teachers connect to families and bridge the barrier of language and culture. Parents are encouraged to participate in school events such as class trips, attending the school Art Show and Science Fair, Seasonal Concerts. ● providing parents with information relating to City, State, and Federal standards and assessments during Parent Association meetings and workshops. Information relating to the Common Core Learning Standards and preparing students for college and career are shared during Parent-Teacher Conferences. The information is sent home in various languages. Translators are available at all meetings and workshops. ● providing parents with Go Math and Core Knowledge Language Arts (CKLA) introductory letters explaining unit objectives. ● translating notices sent to parents into Spanish and Chinese which are the dominant home languages of parents in our school. Parental Involvement and School Quality Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parent/guardians of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents. The results will be used to improve the academic quality of our school. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: ● actively involve parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact. These activities take place during School Leadership Team meetings and Parent-Association Meetings in addition to Title I meetings. ● invite Parent members of the Title I committee to discuss and decide on how to spend the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills. ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. ● staff a Parent Coordinator who serves as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator provides parent workshops and disseminates community resources for parents. Having an office on the first floor in close proximity to the main entrance, enables our Parent Coordinator to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator maintains a log of events and activities that are planned for parents each month and files a report with the central office. 9  ● provide parent workshops that address topics such as: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. ● discuss student Proficiency Levels, School Quality Report, Quality Review report, and Learning Environment Survey results with parents at School Leadership Team Meetings, Parent Association Meetings and at parent teacher conferences. ● hold the required Annual Title I Parent meeting, advising parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program, their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● hold nine Parent Association meetings throughout the year. Two meetings are held in the evening. There are four quarterly meetings held with the PA Executive Board. School Leadership Team Meetings are held monthly with additional meetings scheduled as needed. Meetings take place after school. Information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor are shared. Parents are encouraged to provide suggestions as to how the school community can better meet the needs of the students and parents we serve. Parent suggestions that were acted upon include the adoption of a school uniform policy and revising the pedestrian flow of traffic in schoolyard during dismissal, better translations and changes to school progress report. ● ensure that all critical school documents are translated and translators are available for all meetings and events. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences. Throughout the school year a variety of events are organized to welcome parents such as the Grade Concerts, an Annual Art Show, a Science Fair, Pinwheels for Peace workshop, a Chinese New Year Celebration, Heritage Festival Day and Earth Day activities. ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee, as well as involvement in the classroom through participation on school trips, classroom projects and school events. ● providing a Parent Resource Center/Area accessible outside the main office and maintained by Parent Coordinator. ● providing written progress reports that are periodically (three times a year) given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress. ● distributing a monthly school calendar and utilizing school messenger to keep parents informed about school activities. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 28, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 0  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently. ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences. ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas. ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● hosting four evening parent teacher conferences during the school year. They shall be held in September, November, March and May. There will be two afternoon parent teacher conferences. ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved. ● teachers meeting with parent during the 40 minute parent engagement block on Tuesdays, and arranging additional meetings at other flexible times. ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education ● providing information related to school and parent programs, community events, meetings and other activities. ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact. ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information. ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 1  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents. ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member. ● arranging opportunities for parents to participate in their child’s class activities. ● planning activities for parents during the school year both school wide and in the classroom. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians. ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend). ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community. ● Supporting parental involvement activities as request by parents. ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities As a parent I must: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent. ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age. ● check over and assist my child in completing homework tasks when necessary. ● read to my child and /or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes). ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games. ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as clubs, team sports and/or quality family time. 2  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child. ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits. ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education. ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district. ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested. ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact. ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible. ● take part in the school’s Parent Association and serve to the extent possible on advisory groups e.g. Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Team. ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities As a student I must: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time. ● complete my homework, submit all assignments on time and ask for help when needed. ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions. ● show respect for myself, other people and property. ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully. ● always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We are a Pre-K to Grade 2 Early Childhood Center. An analysis of our NYSELSAT subtest data revealed that the greatest areas of need are Listening and Writing. 48% of our first and second grade ELLs are below Commanding level in the area of Listening while 68% of our first and second grade ELLs are below Commanding level in the area of Writing. We will be providing an after school program to give the ELLs the support they need in the areas of Listening and Writing, along with Speaking, to become commanding in the English language. Puppetry in Practice, along with the support of ENL teachers, will provide an after school program for all our ELL students in Grades 1 and 2 to give them the additional support they need to become/continue to be commanding in the English language. The goal of this program is to enhance the curriculum for ELLs through the use of puppet making and dramatic play. Through the use of puppetry and performance, Puppetry in Practice has found students improve their speaking and listening in the English language. Starting with an interactive puppet performance by Puppetry in Practice, students will create their own puppets and become storytellers themselves. Using a puppet helps students communicate more freely in English with less concern of failure or embarrassment because the puppet is doing the talking. When the puppet does or says something silly, the audience laughs at the puppet in adoration rather than ridicule. In addition, the creation of puppet characters involves decision making regarding materials and ways to give a puppet character and personality. Students share ideas and create storyboards, drawings and sound effects to give life to the character they create. The building of sets and props makes use of many talents and abilities and is a way to "showcase" what they create. At the end of each session, students will use a writing journal to reflect upon their learning and practice their writing skills with the support of the ENL teacher. The goal of this after school program is to give students an experience which will result in higher student achievement in the Listening, Writing and Speaking components of the NYSESLAT assessment. Students will also be able to transfer these skills to ELA Reading and Writing as they learn about character study and become better participants in class discussions. For over 30 years, Puppetry in Practice has witnessed and documented English Language Learners bypass the self-editing process that often limits their verbal expression. Through their puppet, students speak freely and with conviction in both improvised dramatic play or within a narrative structure. Through ongoing explorations and experiences with puppets and performance, students naturally build confidence in speaking in front of others, speaking to one another and speaking with the intent of communicating a story, infused with their personal point of view, to others. In puppet play and improvised class dramas, students interact with one another through their puppets, enhancing their listening skills by responding to the verbal queues presented by their peers. In these exchanges, students are afforded the opportunity to develop a flow of language, both in speaking and listening, with their puppets to recount stories or events from their personal lives. 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The CCLS ELA & Literacy: Speaking and Listening and Language standards this program will address are as follows: SL.1.1.b: Build on others' talk in conversations by responding to the comments of others through multiple exchanges. SL.1.d: Seek to understand and communicate with individuals from different cultural backgrounds. SL.1.3: Ask and answer questions about what a speaker says in order to gather additional information or clarify something that is not understood. SL.1.4: Describe people, places, things and events with relevant details, expressing ideas and feelings clearly. SL.1.5: Add drawings or other visual displays to descriptions when appropriate to clarify ideas, thoughts and feelings clearly. SL.1.6: Produce complete sentences when appropriate to task and situation. SL.2.2: Recount or describe key ideas or details from a text read aloud or information presented orally or through other media. SL.2.4: Tell a story or recount an experience with appropriate facts and relevant, descriptive details, speaking audibly in coherent sentences. L.1/2.1: Demonstrate command of the conventions of standard English grammar and usage when writing or speaking. L1/2:2: Demonstrate the conventions of standard English capitalization, punctuation, and spelling when writing. This program is scheduled to begin October 2018 and end in May 2019. The program will be held on Wednesdays from 2:40 - 5:00 pm for 2 hours 20 minutes. There will be three eight-week cycles with 60 students participating in each cycle. For the first cycle, Entering and Emerging Grade 1 and 2 ELLs will be invited to the program. Cycle two and three will include Transitioning and Expanding Grade 1 and 2 ELL students. The program will consist of 2 teaching artists from Puppetry in Practice and 4 certified ENL teachers and 3 certified Bilingual teachers. The 7 ENL teachers will provide a student-teacher ratio of 8:1. The instruction will be primarily in English with Spanish Native Language support. The Spanish Language support will be provided by four Bilingual teachers and one Bilingual Puppetry in Practice teaching artist. The 7 ENL teachers will provide instructional support by: providing visual support for vocabulary and English grammar (charts), context vocabulary support, prompts for students to engage in conversation and discussion, language structure support, and working with small groups (2-3 students) during sessions to differentiate the level of support needed for students to participate in the session's activities. All supports will contribute and support student language development. P.S. 28Q has had a successful relationship with Puppetry in Practice for over seven years. Puppetry in Practice is an approved Department of Education vendor. The cost of the program will include the services provided by Puppetry in Practice (teaching artist, materials), additional 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information materials that are not provided by Puppetry in Practice for the puppets, storyboards and set designs will be purchased by the school, teacher and supervisor per session for the 27 week program and 3 hour professional development and the educational software Lexia Core 5 which will be used by the student at home with their parent to enhance vocabulary knowledge and improve speaking and listening skills. This program will cost the budgeted amount of $41,550. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Puppetry in Practice will provide 3 hours of professional development for the 7 ENL teachers focusing on incorporating puppetry and dramatic play into the classroom. The PD will provide teachers simple and effective techniques that can enhance their lessons and develop a richer learning experience for students in language proficiency as well as other content areas. Strategies include transforming a storybook featured in the classroom curriculum into a puppet performance, creating unique and functional puppets, and how to provide students with the necessary prompts and comfort for them to develop performance and speaking and listening skills with others in front of others. The PD is hands-on activities and will be given to teachers for 1.5 hours in September and 1.5 hours in December. Topics to be covered are: Puppet Making: Teachers learn several techniques for puppet making. Puppetry in Practice will demonstrate how to use a variety of materials suitable for young children and show teachers the benefits of allowing the students opportunity to explore and make selections to match the idea of the puppet character in their head. Teachers will understand that through this creative expression students will yearn to talk about what they are making and why. Creative expression leads to verbal expression as teachers learn to ask questions about the child's puppet. Giving the Puppet a Voice: Teachers learn the value of handmade puppets over store bought puppets and learn that when students make their own puppets, ownership and efficacy are the motivating factors that give students the willingness and confidence to give their creation a voice. Giving your puppet a voice involves writing exercises to plan, speaking activities to improvise, small group collaborations and play. Teachers are taught simple techniques that give students space to be silly and ease into a comfortable place where their puppets can come alive as they envision. Puppet Perfomance: Teachers learn how to put it all together. How to develop storyboards with students, create dialogue, associate stories with point of view, and put on puppet performances in the classroom and for a parent audience. 7  Part C: Professional Development Luciano Cohen and Jason Leinwand will be the teaching artists providing student instruction and teacher professional development. Luciano is a storyteller-puppeteer native of Argentina specializing in young audiences since 1999. He began his career in Buenos Aires as a puppeteer and then moved to the USA in 2006 where he earned his Early Childhood teaching degree. He designed shows dedicated to children's behavior, in which they would interact, practice or watch real life situations without feeling stress in a fun environment with puppets, acting and music. Luciano has performed his puppet shows for hundreds of early childhood students and has guided them in the creations of their own props and performances with hands-on, child-centered activities. Luciano is also able to support the students in their native language of Spanish. Jason is the Puppetry in Practice Education Director and an Early Childhood adjunct professor at Brooklyn College. He uses animation and art to inspire our young ELL students to create innovative characters and settings that tell a story. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: During each cycle, parents will be invited to learn how to partner with the school to learn how to use the educational software Lexia Core 5 with their child at home. Lexia Core 5 aligns with best practices in English Learner instruction. The program provides audio directions in Spanish and Chinese, the home languages of our students. This program helps students work independently and successfully at all levels of language proficiency. Activities are designed to enhance vocabulary knowledge focus on words with multiple meanings, analogies and shades of meaning. An interactive parent workshop will be held in the beginning of each cycle for the students' parents. A trained educator, with translation provided by the Parent Coordinator and other school staff, will conduct the hands-on workshop. Parents will learn how to use the program by being able to sign on themselves and experience the program first hand. They will learn how it will benefit their child and how to assist their child at home. The goal is to foster English Language Learning through the use of technology, where parents are able to learn how to use this program at home to support their child as they become proficient in the English language. The parents will be notified in September and prior to the start of each cycle, by letter, translated in the parents' preferred language, (sent home with the student) inviting them to participate in the program with follow-up conducted by the Parent Coordinator throughout each cycle. 8 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Thomas Emanuel Early Childhood Center Borough Queens School Number 028 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Laura Pessutti Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Juana Colon Teacher/Subject Area Dahlia Schoenberg-Lam, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Jeanette Urena, ENL Related-Service Provider Christina Kollbeck, IEP/SETTS Superintendent Madelene Chan Assistant Principal Elizabeth Brizo Coach N/A School Counselor Elizabeth Rivas Parent Graciela Juarez Parent Coordinator Miriam Roman Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) Madelene Chan C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 8 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 4 8 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 493 Total number of ELLs 330 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 66.94% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish TBE TBE Spanish Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2002-2003 2003-2004 2004-2005 K 1 0 0 1 1 0 2 1 0 1 0 1 DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 28Q uses easyCBM (Curriculum Based Measure) as an initial universal literacy screener and progress monitoring tool for our early childhood learners. All students in Grades K-2 are tested a minimum of three times a year. Students who are primarily Spanish speakers are also administered the easyCBM in Spanish as well as English. Students who score in the 50th percentile or above are considered to be performing at grade level. Students in Kindergarten are tested for knowledge of letter names, letter sounds, and phoneme segmenting. Students in First Grade are tested for letter sounds, phoneme segmenting and word reading fluency, while Second Grade students are tested in reading fluency, vocabulary, passage reading fluency, and reading comprehension. This data is used to make decisions about further support through Response to Intervention tiered instruction as well as enrichment instruction. 1  In addition to this initial screening, a variety of formative and summative assessments are used to guide instructional planning for our English Language Learners. NYSITELL, Spanish Lab and NYSESLAT data is used to identify student English proficiency in the four modalities (listening, speaking, reading, writing). Curriculum-embedded assessments are also used such as Core Knowledge Language Arts Domain Assessments for Listening, Learning and Reading Skills, and Being A Writer writing assessments. Teachers use student observation, conference notes, running records, and student work products to assess their students. A NYC Performance Task is used as a summative assessment. A baseline and end of year assessment is given to all students to measure student learning for the year. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? easyCBM data is reviewed three times a year by the Response to Intervention team to determine which students need additional Tier 2 and Tier 3 support. This team involves Administrators, Response to Intervention providers, classroom teachers, and ENL teachers who review the data to gain a complete academic and social picture of the student. Data Meetings, consisting of the Administrators, Classroom teacher, ENL provider and RTI teacher, meet quarterly to discuss class as well as individual student progress. During this time, formative assessments are reviewed to determine the tool's effectiveness. ENL teachers meet with classroom teachers on a weekly basis to discuss student data from NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, and classroom formative assessments to determine student next steps. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As an Early Childhood Center, grades Pre-K to 2, we use two assessments to identify baseline, progress and areas of need: easyCBM and the NYC Performance Task. easyCBM (English and Spanish) is administered three times a year and identifies a literacy baseline in the five pillars of reading (phonics, phonemic awareness, fluency, comprehension, vocabulary), and indicates progress as well as areas of need. The NYC Performance Task is administered as a baseline and end of year assessment. In order to ensure that students are making adequate progress, we also administer a mid-year task. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? An intervention structure is in place to address the results of the data gathered from both school wide and classroom summative assessments. Each classroom has a designated daily period for Tier 1 intervention - small group instruction. Teachers use the data gathered from these summative assessments to determine individual student need and provide the appropriate intervention during this period. Once the summative data has been gathered, the Response to Intervention team meets to determine which students need Tier 2 and Tier 3 intervention. Students receive small group Tier 2 instruction four days a week, by a designated trained Response to Intervention teacher. Tier 3 instruction is provided to students who are not making adequate Tier 2 progress by the SETTS teacher five days a week. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All students are administered a Universal Screener, easyCBM, in September, to determine if they are on grade level, or if not, what is their level of risk. This screener assesses students in letter sounds, letter names, phonemic segmentation, word reading, passage reading fluency, vocabulary, and reading comprehension. Students begin by receiving high quality Tier 1 core instruction, which promotes language and literacy development, by the classroom teacher. All teachers are trained to understand the linguistic, cultural, and experiential context of each student in their classroom. This is supported by differentiated groups and a push-in program by the ENL teacher where appropriate instruction and assessments are provided 2  to meet the unique needs of each ELL. The ENL teacher uses the data provided by the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL in conjunction with this screener to provide the individualized support that the ELL needs. Progress monitoring is ongoing both inside the classroom with the teacher, with the ENL provider, and through the formal easyCBM assessment which is administered three times a year. RTI (Response to Intervention) committee meetings are held with the teacher and ENL provider to discuss students who are not making adequate progress. An ecological approach to information gathering is taken in which the RTI commitee looks at a variety of issues related to struggling ELLs. They look at the language, background experiences, values, norms, learning styles, proficiency in both languages, content area strengths and weaknesses, how instruction is provided, and family educational history of these ELLS. The committee measures the multiple components of reading and language to identify learning disabled students among the ELLs. Students who are not making progress are recommended to receive Tier 2 support in a small pull-out program with a trained RTI provider who uses research based programs such as Leveled Literacy Intervention, Great Leaps, and Fundations. For students who continue to not make adequate progress, Tier 3 intervention is given in addition to the core curriculum. This intervention is one-to-one with the intervention matched to the student's specific needs. Progress monitoring for both Tier 2 and Tier 3 intervention is conducted every 2-4 weeks. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. An analysis of the overall NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data revealed that in Kindergarten 6% of students are Entering while this number decreases as students move to First (3%) and Second (2%) grades. The number of Kindergarten students who are Emerging/Transitioning is 13%, increasing to 57% in First grade and then decreasing substantially to 13% in second grade. Expanding students demonstrate the same trend with 56% of Kindergarten students are at this level, decreasing to 35% in first grade and then increasing to 65% in second grade. 25% of ELL students who took the NYSESLAT test scored at a Commanding level. The ELL Data Analysis Tool revealed that the modality of strength for the ELL students taking the NYSESLAT is in the area of reading followed by the other modalities of listening, speaking and writing. 41% of the students scored high in the reading modality, followed by 33% in listening, 29% in speaking and 23% in writing. The area of need, as shown in this report, is in the modality of writing. 15% of the students who took the NYSESLAT scored low in this modality, while only 6% scored low in the speaking modality, 0% in the reading modality and 0% in listening. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The findings, as gathered from the ELL Data Analysis Tool, is disseminated at the opening Chancellor's Conference Day. It is distributed to ENL teachers, classroom teachers, Response to Intervention specialists, paraprofessionals, service providers and Administrators. Teams of educators analyze individual student data as well as trends across the grade and across the school to determine what the student needs are and how best to meet these needs. Programs are looked at to determine if the needs of the students' are being met. Adjustments to the programs are made on an ongoing basis throughout the year based on ongoing collection of student data. ENL teachers have monthly congruence periods, in addition to meeting with teachers daily/weekly, to discuss student progress and determine what the next steps are for each student. Adjustments are made to make certain that student progress is being made. Part IV: ELL Programming 3  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our Freestanding ENL program consists of both stand-alone and integrated ENL instruction in the push-in and self-contained models. Students are heterogeneously grouped with mixed proficiency levels in each model. For the stand-alone ENL instruction and integrated instruction, the push-in model is used where an ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with the classroom teacher to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher work collaboratively in planning their lessons. The goal of the ENL instruction is to develop English language skills so that the students can succeed in core content courses. Integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction is used through a self-contained model where the teacher has dual certification in ENL and common branches. The teacher uses ENL strategies to build English language skills through content area instruction. The Freestanding ENL program consists of 129 ELL students in Kindergarten, 101 ELL students in First Grade, and 100 ELL students in Second Grade, in a combination stand-alone and integrated instruction. Four appropriately certified ENL teachers service students in grades K-2 for five periods daily in a stand-alone, push-in model. These certified pedagogues provide the appropriate number of minutes of ENL instruction during the week, per CR Part 154, based on the student proficiency levels according to NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. There are four ENL classes (3 Kindergarten, 1 Second Grade) with each class being taught by a teacher having dual certification in ENL and common branches. The ENL program model consists of heterogeneous mixture of proficiency levels in General Education, ICT, and Special Education classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. The Transitional Bilingual Education program consists of three Special Education Transitional Bilingual Spanish classes, one class on each grade level - kindergarten, first, and second grade. Each class is taught by an appropriately certified Special Education teacher with a bilingual extension. These classes consist of 12 ELLs in Kindergarten, 12 ELLs in First Grade and 12 ELLs in Second Grade. The program consists of a heterogeneous mixture of proficiency levels. Students receive an ENL component designed to develop their skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in English. Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies are taught in Spanish and English at the entering and emerging levels. Students transfer their home language skills to English by receiving 75% instruction in Spanish and 25% in English at the beginning/entering level. As the students’ proficiency increases, more of the instructional day is spent learning in English. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? P.S. 28Q ensures the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in our Transitional Bilingual Special Education classes as well as in our Freestanding English Program. The ENL program follows a push-in model where the ENL teacher works with ELLs in collaboration with the classroom teacher to build English language skills through ELA instruction. Entering level students in the ENL program receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 integrated ENL/ELA minutes. The Emerging level students receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 integrated ENL/ELA minutes. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 ENL/ELA minutes. Commanding students receive 90 integrated ENL/ELA minutes. Students in the Transitional Bilingual Special Education classes receive a home language component designed to develop their 4  skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in the Spanish language while gaining an appreciation of their history and culture. Students who are at the Entering level receive 75% instruction in Spanish and 25% in English. They receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA. Emerging level students receive 60% instruction in Spanish and 40% instruction in English. They receive 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/Mathematics. Transitioning students receive 50% instruction in Spanish and 50% in English. They receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of integrated ENL/Mathematics instruction. Expanding students receive 25% instruction in Spanish and 75% in English. They receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction. All students in TBE receive one class in Spanish Language Arts. They also receive instruction in Spanish and English for Science and Social Studies. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Spanish Transitional Bilingual Special Education The Spanish Transition Bilingual Special Education classes use the ELA program, Core Knowledge Language Arts, which is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. This research-based program provides a core Literacy curriculum that is coherent, cumulative and content-specific in order to help students establish a strong foundation of knowledge, incrementally. This program consists of a Skills strand, which focuses on decoding and reading and writing in tandem. The Listening and Learning strand focuses on students' oral and vocabulary development along with building content knowledge. Teachers use the Core Knowledge Supplemental Guide which was designed for the ELL student to scaffold their content and vocabulary knowledge. A new writing program, Being a Writer, was introduced in the Fall of 2017. This program helps students develop as writers and as caring, collaborative people. This dual focus of academic learning with social learning will help develop the ELL student both academically and socially as they become proficient writers in the English language. English Language Development instructional strategies are integrated throughout the program. These strategies help make the content comprehensible, support students at their individual level of language proficiency, and help students see themselves as valuable members of the classroom community. Content area programs used are: Go Math Spanish edition, Harcourt Science Spanish edition, Passport Social Studies, and Estrellita Spanish Language Arts program. Differentiated instruction for students who have special needs consists of both small grouping and individual support given by the native language teacher and paraprofessional. Differentiated grouping is also done by modality to support these students’ individual ENL needs. Native language support is given through the use of native language texts, word walls, picture support and picture dictionaries, as well as labeling the room. Spanish Language and Reference books are used in Go Math, Science and Social Studies. ENL approaches and strategies are also used in all content areas in order to achieve maximum proficiency. Technology is used in the classroom through lessons generated with the use of a Smart Board. Students are given the opportunity to work on laptops and iPads to practice their reading and math skills. ELL students in the TBE program are assessed using easyCBM (English and Spanish), Core Knowledge Domain Assessments, Go Math Unit Assessments, Being a Writer Assessments, NYC Performance Tasks, NYSESLAT, and teacher generated assessments. These assessments are used to determine students’ academic progress along with their level of English language acquisition. The results help to determine at what level the students are performing academically and what modalities need to be focused on. Self-Contained ENL Classrooms The self-contained ENL program includes daily instruction in all curriculum areas in English using ENL strategies. Students use the ELA research-based Core Knowledge Language Arts Program. In this program students have two 60 minutes blocks. One for Listening and Learning, where they listen to read alouds, and answer comprehension questions, and the other which is a Skills strand, where students build decoding and reading skills. In the Core Knowledge Language Arts and Listening Strand, students build the background knowledge and vocabulary critical to listening and reading comprehension. The decoding skills 5  needed for future independent reading are taught separately in the Core Knowledge Language Arts Skills Strand. The two strands complement each other, building the requisite decoding and comprehension skills that comprise fluent, mature reading. Teachers use the Core Knowledge Supplemental Guide which was designed for the ELL student to scaffold their content and vocabulary knowledge. A new writing program, Being a Writer, was introduced in the Fall of 2017. This program helps students develop as writers and as caring, collaborative people. This dual focus of academic learning with social learning will help develop the ELL student both academically and socially as they become proficient writers in the English language and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. English Language Development instructional strategies are integrated throughout the program. These strategies help make the content comprehensible, support students at their individual level of language proficiency, and help students see themselves as valuable members of the classroom community. The dual licensed ENL teacher utilizes computer programs including Imagine Learning, Lexia Core 5, and Reading A-Z, small group instruction, the use of the Core Knowledge Supplemental Guide, and effective ENL strategies and methodologies to assist students in developing English language proficiency. Instruction is conducted in English with 25% native language support through the use of native language texts, word walls, picture support and picture dictionaries, labeling the room, and pairing students with the same native language. ENL approaches and strategies are also used in all content areas. Technology is used in the classroom through lessons generated with the use of a Smart Board. Students are given the opportunity to work on laptops and iPads to practice their reading and math skills. ELL students in the TBE program are assessed using easyCBM (English and Spanish), Core Knowledge Domain Assessments, Go Math Unit Assessments, Being a Writer Assessments, NYC Performance Tasks, NYSESLAT, and teacher generated assessments. These assessments are used to determine students’ academic progress along with their level of English language acquisition. The results help to determine at what level the students are performing academically and what modalities need to be focused on. ENL Stand-Alone/Integrated Model ELL students receive instruction from four appropriately certified ENL teachers. The ENL program follows a push-in stand-alone and integrated model. ENL teachers push in to classrooms to work with small, differentiated groups using ENL strategies to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in ELA. As per CR Part 154, all beginner/entering and low intermediate/emerging students receive the mandated minimum of 180/90 minutes of ENL instruction each week. ENL teachers also follow the integrated model by pushing in and co-teaching with the classroom teacher. The model is for building English language skills through ELA content area instruction using ENL strategies. As per CR Part 154, all ELL students including former ELLs, receive the mandated minimum of 180/90 integrated ENL/ELA instruction. The ENL teacher uses the data generated from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT to inform their instruction. Students are looked at closely through the four modalities to insure that they will reach maximum proficiency in the English language. Scaffolding and differentiating instruction are an integral part of our Core Knowledge Language Arts program as well as in our content area instruction. Differentiation is based upon the analysis of the scale scores as provided by NYSESLAT and NYSITELL assessments. Visuals, hands on experiences, charts, songs, chants, graphic organizers, meaningful accountable talk, sentence frames, and discussion prompts are part of the instruction. Instruction is delivered in English with ENL teachers providing 25% Native Language Support through native language books and dictionaries in the classroom, literacy manipulatives such as dry wipe boards, magnetic letters, sentence strips of poems and stories, labeling the room, picture support, and pairing students with the same native language. ENL teachers who are native language speakers also provide support to clarify meanings, ideas, and content. The ENL and classroom teachers meet weekly during common preps to discuss student data and lesson planning with the purpose of aligning instruction to address student needs. ENL and classroom teachers have a Congruence period monthly to review and discuss short and long term goals for each student. 6  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students who did not pass the NYSITELL are given the Spanish LAB to ascertain whether the child is fluent in their native language. In addition, students are assessed in their native language using running records to determine their reading proficiency. Students are screened in reading three times a year using easyCBM in Spanish and English. NYC Performance Tasks are administered in students' native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Not applicable b. Differentiation for Newcomers is based upon the analysis of the scale scores as provided by NYSESLAT and NYSITELL assessments. Differentiated instruction for Newcomer ELLs, who are special needs students, consist of both small grouping and individual support given by the native language teacher and paraprofessional. Differentiated grouping is also done by modality to support these students’ individual ENL needs. Teachers use the Core Knowledge Supplemental Guide to teach the Listening and Learning strand. This guide was designed for the ELL student to scaffold their content and vocabulary knowledge. Teachers also use the computer program, Imagine Learning, Lexia Core 5, Reading A-Z, small group instruction, and effective ENL strategies and methodologies to assist students in developing English language proficiency. ENL, classroom teachers and paraprofessionals who are native language speakers also provide support to clarify meanings, ideas and content. Progress is monitored through easyCBM in Spanish and English, as well as through classroom assessments administered in the students' native language. c. Since P.S. 28Q is an early childhood center, Pre-K through Grade 2, the majority of our ELL students are classified as “newcomers”. Students who are required to repeat the grade would be the only students receiving four years of service. These students receive differentiated support through small group instruction in their classroom with the ENL and classroom teacher as well as additional support through the Title III program. Students who are not making adequate academic progress also receive Tier 2 and Tier 3 support through the Response to Intervention program (RTI). d. Not applicable e. Students who have reached Commanding level on the NYSESLAT continue to receive ENL support for two years to maintain and enhance their English proficiency. They receive integrated ENL instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use the Core Knowledge Language Arts Supplemental Guide to teach the Listening and Learning strand. This guide was designed for the ELL-SWD students to scaffold their content and vocabulary knowledge - Grade K-2 editions.Being a Writer program is used with effective English Language Development instructional strategies integrated throughout the program.Go Math ELL Activity Guide, Grade K-2 editionsResponse to Intervention Tier 2 and Tier 3 support for students who are not meeting adequate academic progress as set forth in their IEPExplicit Vocabulary instruction as part of the Literacy program Extra picture support, interactive word wall with Spanish cognates, sentence framesTechnology programs such as Imagine Learning, a research based computer program that builds oral vocabulary specifically developed for ELLs Grades K-2, as well as Reading A-Z, and Lexia Core 5 7  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 28Q does not differentiate curriculum for our ELL-SWDs. All students receive the same curriculum throughout Grades K-2. The curriculum used for all content areas is research-based and has ELL and SWD differentiated components which address the needs of all our students. ELL-SWD classes participate with General Education classes for Music and Physical Education. Students share the same lunch periods, participate as a grade on all class trips and activities, use the same texts and assessments in all content areas. Instructional differentiation and accommodations are made based on student need. Before an ELL student is recommended for a more restrictive environment, the student receives Response to Intervention - Tier 1, 2, and 3 support. Once it is determined that the student's lack of progress is not due to a language deficit, the student is then recommended for further testing to determine why the student is not making adequate progress. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students in grades K-2, including students with special needs and students who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT, receive academic support through the Response to Intervention (RTI) program within the school day. All students are screened using easyCBM (Spanish and English), a norm referenced reading assessment. Students who score in the 50th percentile or above are considered to be performing at grade level. Students who fall below the 30th percentile are considered to be at high risk and receive intervention support. Instruction focuses on literacy in both a small group push-in and pull-out model. These supports and resources correspond with the students grade and age. The programs used are: Go Math Reteach in Small Groups; Core Knowledge Supplemental Guide; CKLA Remediation and Assessment Guide; Leveled Literacy Instruction; and Great Leaps. Tier 2 ELL students receive intervention three to five days a week for a 30 minute period. Tier 3 ELL students receive targeted one-on-one support daily by an RTI Specialist. All ELL students are supported by a trained ENL pedagogue in small group ELA instruction. All ENL teachers use the Supplemental Guide which provides more focus on Tier 2 vocabulary, as well as modified assessments. All newly arrived and beginner ELLs are receiving extra support using the research-based ENL computer program, Imagine Learning. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The writing program, Being a Writer, helps students develop as writers and as caring, collaborative people. This dual focus of academic learning with social learning will help develop the ELL student both academically and socially as they become proficient writers in the English language. English Language Development instructional strategies are integrated throughout the program. These strategies help make the content comprehensible, support students at their individual level of language proficiency, and help students see themselves as valuable members of the classroom community. An increase in experiential learning through partnerships with the Hall of Science, Puppetry in Practice, Queens Museum of Art, Queens Zoo, Puppetry in Practice, Swim for Life. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any programs/services for ELLs at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are offered equal access to all school programs. All students participate in the many school celebrations such as Fall Festival, Lunar New Year Festival, Hispanic Heritage Day, and Field Day. All students participate in the Music program which consists of vocal and learning the recorder. Students perform at grade level concerts. All students participate in an Arts program with their work celebrated not only in the school but at local museums. A partnership with Puppetry in Practice, an early childhood program geared toward ELLs, uses puppetry and the arts to further language development for all students, especially the ELL population. All students also participate in partnerships with the Queens Museum of Art, Hall of Science, Queens Zoo, Swim for Life. ELL students are offered a Title III program, a collaboration with teaching artists from Puppetry in Practice and ENL teachers. A free after school tennis program from New York Junior Tennis and Learning is offered to all first and second grade students. In addition, targeted ELLs are given iPads with apps such as: Sentence Magic, Vocab PCS, Phonics Consonants, iwrite words, Sight Words, and Sentence Magic, as an additional resource for building sight word knowledge, 8  vocabulary, and phonemic awareness. ELL students also receive RTI (Response to Intervention) support for those students who are not making adequate academic progress. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of instructional materials and visuals are used in the classroom to support ELL instruction in literacy and in the content areas. In the Spanish Transitional Bilingual Education classrooms, teachers use the program Estrellita as their Spanish Language Arts Program. Go Math Spanish edition, and Harcourt Science Spanish edition. Passport to Social Studies, and Being a Writer are also used in the classroom. Teachers follow the Core Knowledge Language Arts Curriculum utilizing effective ENL methodologies and strategies. Our literacy classrooms are equipped with leveled libraries, which include books across many genres and content areas as well as books and dictionaries in native languages. Students also use literacy manipulatives such as dry wipe boards, magnetic letters, books on tape and sentence strips of poems and stories. Classrooms contain a print rich environment with word walls, interactive word walls with Spanish cognates, charts containing picture representations, artifacts that support rituals and routines, nursery rhymes, and labeling of room. Students are provided with materials that are familiar to them to give them an experiential base to build upon. Teachers provide intensive and explicit vocabulary instruction to increase language acquisition by the ELL student. The Listening and Learning Strand of Core Knowledge emphasizes vocabulary acquisition, and the supplemental guide enhances students' Tier 2 vocabulary learning. A remediation and assessment guide is used in small groups to reinforce the lessons and vocabulary from the program. Go Math provides differentiated instruction for all ELL students and utilizes math manipulatives for hands on experience. The Science cluster teacher provides students with an investigative approach to learning this content area. An extensive Arts program which includes music, visual arts, animation and theater serves as a learning tool to support all our ELL students. Technology is an integral part of instruction for the ELL students. Teachers all use Smart Boards, and document cameras in their classrooms as an instructional tool. All classrooms have access and utilize the internet for research. Classrooms are equipped with I-Pads and use I-pad apps such as: Sentence Magic, Vocab PCS, Phonics Consonants, iwrite words, Sight Words, and Sentence Magic, as an additional resource for building sight word knowledge, vocabulary, and phonemic awareness. Beginner ELLs utilize the ENL research- based computer program, Imagine Learning. All first and second grade students are learning how to type using the program "Type to Learn Jr." Other computer programs, such as One More Story, Starfall, Reading A to Z and Lexia Core 5, are being used in the classroom to support the ELL students in having books read to them and providing students opportunities to practice phonics and letter and word recognition. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered in the Transitional Bilingual Special Education Program through instruction conducted by certified bilingual special education teachers. Additional support is given through Estrellita Spanish Language Arts program, Go Math Spanish edition, and Harcourt Science Spanish edition. Teachers also use native language books, word walls, picture dictionaries, books on tape, charts containing picture representations and manipulatives. Native language support is delivered in the self-contained and push-in ENL program through native language texts, word walls, picture dictionaries, books on tape, charts containing picture representations, artifacts that support rituals and routines, nursery rhymes, and labeling of room. Teachers and paraprofessionals as well as other school staff and parent coordinator are available to translate to students and families when needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required service support and resources correspond to ELLs’ age and grade levels. Appropriate Early Childhood grades K-2 materials are used with our students. Services and resource supports are chosen based on the student's age and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not applicable 9  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). ELL students who are newly enrolled are welcome to come to an orientation workshop before the beginning of the new school year. This workshop is conducted by the Bilingual Parent Coordinator in Spanish and English. At this workshop, families are given a packet of activities, such as practicing writing their name, and beginning counting activities that the student can work on during the summer. These students are also given a Welcome to School picture book. These picture books are made available in both Spanish and English. First and second grade ELL students who are new to the country or who did not attend Kindergarten receive additional social support from our Bilingual Guidance Counselor during the school year. Those students whose native language is Chinese receive additional social support from our Chinese language ENL teacher. All new ELLs also receive additional support through a program where they use a research based computer program called Imagine Learning. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? A professional development plan has been developed to support teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff in their professional growth. P.S. 28Q follows a combination of Inquiry approach to learning as well as having teachers attend other professional development opportunities offered by the Department of Education. Differentiated professional development is provided based on a teacher's interest and goals. All ENL teachers and classroom teachers of ELLs participate in a Professional Learning Community that meet weekly for an eight week cycle of learning. These teams study an area of interest in order to learn and grow in their practice. P.S. 28Q has a large ELL population with a considerable number of students, regardless of their ELL status, being second language learners. The learning that comes from these Professional Learning Communities supports all our students, most especially the ELLs. Topics include: • Mathematical Mindsets: Unleashing Students' Potential Through Creative Math, Inspiring Messages and Innovative Teaching • How to Give Effective Feedback to Your Students • Explicit Vocabulary Instruction for the Young Learner Additional professional development activities for ENL teachers and teachers of ELLs include: How to effectively use the ELL Data Analysis Tool to understand student progress • Analyzing NYSELSAT Data • Unpacking the NYSESLAT: Instructional Implications for ELLs • Unpacking the NYSITELL: Instructional Implications for Newcomer ELLs 0  Teachers will also participate in professional development offered by the New York City Department of Education to learn how to support their ELL students as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The professional development requirement of 15% total hours ELL specific PD for all teachers and 50% total hours ELL specific PD for Bilingual Education and ENL teachers is met through ELL specific professional development given to all teachers during Monday Professional Development afternoons, Tuesday team meetings as well as during Conference Days. Teachers study ELL specific topics during their Professional Learning Community cycles. Teachers who have attended ELL specific professional development outside workshops turn-key to the staff during this time. Additionally, a series of workshops are offered that focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Agendas, attendance and PD hand-outs are collected at each meeting. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The involvement of all families, including those of ELLs, is a priority at P.S. 28. Communication with parents is the foundation for true involvement and cooperation with parents. All school-wide notices are sent home in the parents' preferred languages: English, Spanish and Chinese. Spanish and Chinese translation by school pedagogues and staff members is offered during individual parent meetings, and at all parent workshops throughout the year. ENL Teachers meet individually with parents on Tuesdays in September and October to explain and review their child’s NYSELSAT assessment results, and language development needs. Ongoing parent meetings are held throughout the remainder of the year to discuss their child’s language development progress and offer suggestions on how the parent can help their child at home. ENL Teachers also meet with parents during Parent Engagement on Tuesdays on how to help their child develop the English language to succeed in core content areas. The Parent Coordinator is bilingual in English and Spanish and works throughout the year to facilitate a strong home-school connection. She offers workshops on homework help, community resources, special guest speakers and topics of special interest to parents. Workshops are offered by the Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, and teachers on how to help students achieve both in the classroom and at home. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. An extensive menu of activities for ELL parents are made available during the school year. Parents are notified by letter and School Messenger, in English and their native language, as to what the workshop is and when it will be held. Parent Involvement workshops include: • ELL Parent Support Group - meetings are held twice a month • Know Your Rights Forum - Immigration and Housing • English Language Classes - held weekly • ELL Family Days - held at the NY Hall of Science • Salsa Dance Club - sponsored by an Arts as Partners grant for ELLs • Puppetry in Practice - activity night for Title III students and their parents • Cornell University Nutritional Workshops • Summer Program Information Session - summer activities for ELL students 1  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Laura Pessutti, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Thomas Emanuel ECC School DBN: 24Q028 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Laura Pessutti Title Principal Elizabeth Brizo Assistant Principal Miriam Roman Parent Coordinator Juana Colon ENL/Bilingual Teacher Graciela Juarez Parent Jeanette Urena Teacher/Subject Area Dahlia Schoenberg-Lam Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Elizabeth Rivas School Counselor Madelene Chan Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Christina Kollbeck Other IEP/SETTS Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 N/A 06/26/18 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q028 School Name: Thomas Emanuel Early Childhood Cent Superintendent: Madelene Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No MIriam Roman Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess the needs for written and oral translation for our parents, the school utilizes the ATS RAPL Report (Adult Preferred Language Report) and information from the Student Emergency Contact cards. An analysis of these reports indicate that there are 3 preferred written and oral languages: English, Spanish and Chinese. During individual meetings, parents are first asked which language they would like to communicate in. They are then accommodated by having a translator from the school present during the conversation, or the Translation Unit is used if no one is available who speaks the preferred language. For all other languages indicated in the chart below, resources available on the DOE website and/or Translation unit are utilized. . 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Chinese Urdu Arabic English Spanish Tibetan Hindi 28 1 1 85 448 1 1 4.96 .18 .18 15.04 79.29 .18 .18 27 1 1 86 449 1 0 4.78 .18 .18 15.22 79.47 .18 0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families School Calendar Monthly - Sept- June Letters from School Leadership Team to parents Monthly - Sept - June Class/school trip permission slips On-going basis Parent workshop flyers or letters On-going basis Letters for community events On-going basis School notices (conferences, half-day, announcements etc.) On-going basis DOE letters/notices On-going basis How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator creates this document in Spanish and English and distributes to parents monthly. Letter is written, given to Parent Coordinator one week prior to distribution, for translation. Notices are written and translated by classroom teacher, paraprofessional or school aide prior to copying and distribution. Notices are written and translated by Parent Coordinator. Letters are translated by Parent Coordinator or school aide prior to copying and distribution. Notices are given for translation to Parent Coordinator or school aide one week prior to copying and distribution. New York City Department of Education 6  Teacher letters to parents On-going basis Classroom Newsletters On-going basis Classroom teacher, paraprofessional, Parent Coordinator or school aide are given the letter one week prior to distribution for translation. Classroom teacher, paraprofessional, Parent Coordinator or school aide are given the newsletter one week prior to distribution for translation. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Attendance phone calls home Daily Parent meetings with Guidance Counselor On-going basis Tuesday afternoon parent-teacher meetings and workshops Weekly Cool Culture Orientation and Family meetings On-going basis Parent Workshops On-going basis ENL Orientation September Music Concerts Spring Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March and May interpretation service(s)? Phone conversations conducted by Guidance Counselor in English and Spanish. Guidance Counselor conducts meeting in English and Spanish. Translation provided by classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Translation Unit Parent Coordinator conducts meetings in English and Spanish. Parent Coordinator conducts workshops in English and Spanish Parent meeting held with ENL teachers providing translation in English, Spanish and Chinese Translation provided by Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor Translation provided by staff, translation unit 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger, an automated phone relay system, is used with the message translated into English and Spanish. Spanish speaking Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Paraprofessionals, School Aides, and ENL teacher and Chinese speaking ENL teacher will also contact parents by phone. 7  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members will be made aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 during Opening Chancellor Conference Day in September. Staff members will be informed as to which staff members are available for Spanish and Chinese translation. Staff members will be informed about how to use translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation service at this meeting. Staff will receive important updates throughout the year via e-mail and memos to staff. A copy of Regulation A-663 will be placed in each staff member's Professional Handbook to be used for future reference. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is fulfilled by P.S. 28Q regarding parent notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by posting signs at the Main Entrance of the school in English, Spanish and Chinese explaining parents' rights regarding translation and interpretation. A Welcome Poster in English, Spanish and Chinese is also posted at the Main Entrance. Parents' Bill of Rights and Guide to Language Access is made available in the Main Office and in the Parent Coordinator's office as well distributed to the parent community. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P.S. 28Q gathers feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services through parent surveys, verbal feedback given to Parent Coordinator or staff member, workshop evaluations, SLT meetings, PA meetings. Based on parent feedback for a need for privacy, in lieu of using another staff member for translation, the translation unit has been further utilized, allowing parents to keep the conversation private between themselves and the staff member. 8 
