 25Q029 School Name: P.S. 029 QUEENS Principal: JILL LEAKEY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 29 34250001029 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 25Q029 125-10 23rd Avenue, College Point NY 11356 (718) 886-5111 Phone Number: (718) 461-6812 Fax: Jill Leakey-Eisenberg jleakey@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Jill Leakey-Eisenberg Jennifer Wainberg DianaSierra StephenGaffney Teri Ortiz None None None District Information Geographical District: 25 Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing NY, 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: DDimang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 281-7650 Phone Number: (718) 281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: QPN Executive Director’s Office Address: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 225-2020 Phone Number: (718) 391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Jill Leakey-Eisenberg Jennifer Wainberg DianaSierra N/A TerryOrtiz N/A N/A N/A Monica Gomez AlexandraPerez Monica Patino Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/parent Member/parent Member/parent   Name Adam Wahby Jeffrey Haas SuzannePetrilakMiller Stephen Gaffney CorrinCulhane JamesWilliams JennaSchiffman Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/parent Member/parent Member/teacher Member/teacher Member/teacher Member/teacher Member/teacher Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our vision is to ensure we are raising socially responsible and aware students who strive to achieve high levels of learning. Therefore our Instructional Focus is: "Promoting critical thinking and emotional intelligence for all 21st Century learners"   Collaboratively creating a shared vision for an instructional focus is guiding our mission. The collective work of our building to improve student outcomes is ensuring all students are college and career ready. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 29 is a multicultural Elementary School located in College Point Queens. It is composed of 704 students including 36 Pre Kindergarten Students. We have a diverse group of learners with 58 % Hispanic, 29 % Asian, 10 % White and 2% Black. P.S. 29 values the cultural contributions of such a diverse population. With 28 classrooms Pre-K – grade 5, we serve 38 % English as Second Language Learners, and 17 % of Students with Disabilities. In addition, we are a Title I school with 78% of our population eligible for free or reduced lunch. P.S. 29 has many partnerships with outside organizations that help to build Strong Family and Community Ties by supporting our families and students academically, socially and emotionally. Some of these community partnerships include a CASA grant from Poppenhussen Institute which teaches our students the rich history of College Point through a multidisciplinary approach of Arts, Architecture and interactive experiences within the community. A theater program which enhances English Language speaking skills for our ENL students through providing rich theatre experiences including writing, directing and performing their own original productions, Jazz Reach which exposes students to a variety forms of Jazz music. with a cultural emphasis on diversity. College Point Community Senior Center for an inter generational program connecting elderly with our youth. A voluntary committee of staff members who work collaboratively as a Social Emotional Learning Team developing a Positive Behavior Intervention System and a motto that encompasses our shared values and goals. P.S. 29 “ROARS”, (R-Respect O-Organization A-Acceptance R-Responsibility S-Safety) our motto, is helping to improve our school culture and continues to build community for our family here at P.S. 29. This year we will continue to deepen our work in Emotional Intelligence through the work of Marc Brackett's RULER by taking learned strategies and teaching the students about their emotions and how to recognize them . All of these partnerships aide in fostering community collaboration and cultural experiences for our students while increasing self-esteem and confidence to be more successful in all academic areas. We continue to work hard as a community to improve our school culture. As our collaborative Teacher Teams continue to strengthen the alignment between curriculum, assessment and instruction to the Next Generation Learning Standards we are working towards closing the achievement gap, improving student outcomes and refining teacher practice. According to the Framework for Great Schools 2017 -2018 report, an area of focus for us lies in making our instruction more rigorous. In continuing to use our assessments, we are better able to identify individual and groups of students needs through data analysis capabilities so that we can strengthen the rigor of classroom instruction to meet the needs of all of our learners while providing the correct intervention to those who need it. Our 80 minutes of Professional Development has given us the opportunity for a redefined emphasis around analyzing data and developing a culture of collaborative Professional Learning Communities. According to the NYS ELA results, 54% of our students are at level 3 & 4, which is a 14% increase from the previous year. According to our NYS Math results, 51% of our students are at level 3 & 4, which is a 11% increase from the previous year. We believe our focus on promoting critical thinking and emotional intelligence as well as targeting our sub groups will continue to result in increases in academic achievement and improved social emotional well being. 0  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We serve 38 % English as Second Language Learners, and 17 % Students with Disabilities. Our Special Education population is at 11% proficiency on the English Language Arts (ELA) and 25% in proficiency in Math. Although we made an increase in proficiency for both sub groups, there is a strong need to continue to support our Students With Disabilities (SWD's) in both ELA and Mathematics. Our English as New Language Learners showed an increase of 12% in proficiency on the ELA bringing us to 18% proficiency. dropped 4% in proficiency In Math, we showed an 11% increase on the Math exam bringing us to 24% proficiency. Although there is progress, there continues to be a need to support our English as New Language Learners (ENL's) in a more structured and explicit way specifically in ELA and Mathematics. Our Hispanic population scored at 46% proficiency in ELA highlighting a 24% gap between our Asian and Hispanic students. In Mathematics, our Hispanic students scored at 37% proficiency while our Asian students scored at 80% highlighting a 43% gap. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As per the 2017 - 2018 School Quality Guide, we have demonstrated progress in the following area;  Based on the 2017 - 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report we showed an increase in Strong Family and Community Ties. . As per the 2017 - 2018 School Quality Guide, we have demonstrated a need to focus on the following areas:  Based on the 2017 - 2018 Framework for Great Schools Report survey element, teacher to teacher trust within Collaborative Teachers is an area of focus for us. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q029 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 728 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 49 51 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 17 14 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 77.7% % Reduced Lunch 28.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 61.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.96 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 54.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 58 55 27 94.1% 9.8% 15.9% 0.7% 27.6% 0.4% 4 2% 9.2 51.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have analyzed the 2017 - 2018 New York State (NYS) Math assessment data report, the 2017 - 2018 NYS ELA data report, the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Survey, 2017 - 2018 New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) scores, our final Measure of Teacher Practice (MOTP) and our most recent Quality Review. 1) Based on our analysis, our strengths in ELA from the 2017 - 2018 NYS Exam we have found:  A 14% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the ELA which brought us to 54% proficiency level.  A 10% decrease in level 1  A 14% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the Economically Disadvantaged  A 4% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Students with Disabilities  A 12% increase in levels 3 and 4 for English Language Learners  A 12% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Males  A 16% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Females  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Hispanic and Latino students Based on our analysis, our strengths in Math from the 2017 - 2018 NYS Mathematics Exam we have found:  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Math which brought us to 52% proficiency level.  A 4% decrease in level 1  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the Economically Disadvantaged  A 16% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Students with Disabilities  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for English Language Learners  A 9% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Males  A 12% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Females  A 8% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Hispanic and Latino students Strengths on our Quality Review from 2014-2015 include:  Our strong teacher teams who "use an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning". Based on the 2017 -2018 NYC School Survey our strengths include: 3   Strong Family and Community Ties Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYSESLAT analysis our strengths include:  86% of our students made gains on the NYSESLAT  14% of ENL students moved 2 or 3 levles on the NYSESLAT Our strengths according to our MOTP report 2017 -2018 are:  2a, Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport we had 97.25% of our teachers receiving Effective (E) or Highly Effective (HE) on their observations  2d, Managing Student Behavior we had 90.83% of our teachers receiving E or HE on their observations  4e, Growing and Developing Professionally we had 93.58% of our teachers receiving E or HE on their observations 2) Based on our analysis of the NYS 2017-2018 data, our priorities in ELA include:  46% of our students are not functioning at proficiency  89% of our Students with Disabilities are at level 1 and 2  82% of our English Language Learners (ELL's) are at level 1 and 2  54% of our Hispanic and Latino students are performing at level 1 and 2  47% of our economically disadvantaged students are performing at level 1 and 2 Based on our analysis of the 2017-2018 Mathematics data, our priorities in Math include:  48% of our students are not functioning at proficiency  75% of our Students with Disabilities are at level 1 and 2  77% of our ELL's are at level 1 and 2  63% of our Hispanic and Latino students are performing at level 1 and 2  50% of our economically disadvantaged students are performing at level 1 and 2 Priorities on our Quality Review from 2014-2015 include:  2.2: "Align assessments to curricular, use ongoing assessments and grading practices and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels.  1.1: "Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to CCLS and or/ Content Learning Standards" Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Survey our priorities include:  Rigorous Instruction  Collaborative Teachers, in particular innovation and collective responsibility Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYSESLAT analysis our priorities include:   Looking at Expanding students and academic language in content areas where we recognize there is a stall especially amongst grade 3, 4 and 5 students. Focus on "word play" and dissecting academic language to build English Language acquisition and literacy skills 4   We will continue to focus on oral language development for new comer students in all grade levels. Our priorities according to our MOTP report 2017 - 2018 are:  3B - Questioning  3D - Assessment  1E - Designing Coherent Instruction Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all staff will engage in professional learning to support the refinement of curriculum, instruction and assessment that builds conceptual understanding, procedural and computational fluency and application in mathematics resulting in a 3% increase in students proficiency on the NYS Mathematics Assessments. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Professional Development Committee to build trust and shared decision making ● Administering i-Ready Assessment in Math to uncover individual areas of need and support students with a stronger focus ● Year 2 Algebra for All (A4A) in Grade 5 to begin to build Mathematical thinking and understanding. PD team Vertical team Students Teachers  Administrator attendance at Citywide meetings  Partnership with Bank Street College to support K-2  Professional Learning Communities (PLC) groups will be doing content based book studies on thinking, conceptual understanding and math talks ● Cycles of professional learning during Teacher Team work to enhance understanding of Math mindset and thinking with a focus on our P.S. 29 Math Action Plan. ● Unpacking Units of Study to consider the Next Generation Math standards with a lens on understanding the crosswalk and planning for the future with a focus on SWD"s and ELL's ● Examine 1E and make connections to practice ● Examining Rigor in Assessments and tasks Administration Teacher Instructional Mentors Algebra For All Staff Teachers Generation Staff Developer Bank street Staff Developer Teacher Center Staff Developer Monthly PD Meetings i-Ready administered 3X a year. Continued Algebra for All training beginning with cohort 2 summer training August 2018, with training continuing throughout the year on 10/9, 12/4, 1/23, 3/5, 5/14. Our cohort 1 dates are on 10/11, 12/6, 1/25, 3/7, 5/17 Additional professional development throughout the year on 10/10, 10/26, 11/21, 11/28, 12/19, 1/14, 2/13, 3/13, 3/21, 4/17, 5/22. Administrative training on 10/23, 1/14, 5/28. 6  ● Teams of teachers collaboratively looking at student work and identifying gaps in learning and instruction Grade Teams Teachers ● ENL/Special education study group to analyze disproportionate referrals of ENL's and how to support them in Mathematics. Cycles of PLC Learning Cycle 1- 9/4-9/28 Cycle 2-10/1-10/29 Cycle 3-11/5-2/4 Cycle 4-2/11 5-/10 Cycle 5-5/13 -6/21 Bi weekly teacher team meetings. Monthly ELL % SWD referrals. study group. Bi weekly ENL study group. FSC support Administration Teacher Leaders Teacher Center Staff Developer ● Math vertical team work with Generation Ready ● Unpack assessment tasks and develop scaffolding tasks as a means to progress monitor student learning for multiple entry points across grade teams ● Use of i-ready Assessment for grade K-5 classrooms for periodic progress monitoring ● Teachers will utilize features of Assessments to target support in Mathematics All Grade K-5 students-November, February & May Ongoing Extra help program will run in 3, 6 week cycles from October through May. Administration Teacher Leaders Teachers ● Extra Help program before and after school to support Math ● Imagine Learning for beginning ELL students and first time test takers in Math Beginner ELL’s ● Title III program after school ● Curriculum parent workshops on Mathematics mindset and problem solving First time test takers All 2 -5 grade students Teacher Center Staff Developer Administration Teacher Leaders Teacher Center Staff Developer Technology teacher Imagine Learning 4x a week. Title III program in 3-5 week cycles from October through December,January through March and April to June. Parent workshops 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents and guardians in the Fall and Spring. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families in learning about expectations and supporting their children in the following ways: September 17, 2018 - Curriculum Night September 17, 2018 - Parent Orientations September 27, 2018 - K-2 Literacy and Phonemic Awareness    Monthly parent Workshops based on SLT survey:   October 10, 2018 - Family Fitness Night  October 18, 25 and November 1 - Masterful Parenting Series  October 23, 2018 - Social Emotional Learning  Novemebr 13, 2018 - Middle School Night  November 15 2018 - How to Help you Child Organize for Success  November 27, 2018 - Reading and Writing Workshop  December 18, 2018 - Holiday Craft      March 12, 19 and 26, 2019 - Masterful Parenting Series  March 19, 2019 - Preparing your Child for the NYS Math and ELA Exams  April 11, 2019 - International Night  May 14, 2019 - Transitioning to the Next Grade  May 28, 2019 - Math, Reading and Writing Summer Challenge   November, March and May Parent Teacher Conferences  Monthly SLT Meetings  Monthly PTA Meetings January 22, 2019- Bullying Parent Workshop January 31, 2019 - Math Game Night February 7, 2019 - Vocabulary: Why is it so important and how do we build it February 28, 2019 Family Science Night June 3, 2019 - Pajama Story Time Staff Responsible: Administrators, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, United Federation of Teachers (UFT) Staff Developer, Guidance Counselor Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Computers and laptops ● Algebra for All Professional Development (PD) ● ENL teachers & Individualized Education Plan (IEP) teacher ● Per Session for Title III and Extra Help Program 8  ● NYS Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) sample questions tools in Math including performance tasks from Appendix B ● Bank Street PD Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By February 2019, we will analyze and refine the beginning to mid year CCLS aligned Math assessments. We will monitor and refine our Math Action Plan 2X a year. This will allow us to progress monitor. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Mid year CCLS aligned school-wide assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1) School strengths include the following: Strengths on our Quality Review from 2014-2015 include:  Our strong teachers teams who "use an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning". Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Survey our strengths include:  89% of teachers say that adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards.  88% of teachers say that adults at their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging course work despite obstacles.  84% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students to advocate for themselves. Our strengths according to our MOTP report 2017 - 2018 are:  2a, Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport we had 97.25% of our teachers receiving E or HE on their observations  2d, Managing Student Behavior we had 90.83% of our teachers receiving E or HE on their observations This year we have 13 staff members who were trained in the "School Home Visit" program Our Social Emotional Learning (SEL) team continues to guide learning around supporting students in expressing their emotions. 2) Our school priorities include: Priorities according to our 2017 - 2018 suspension and lateness report include:  9 students were suspended in the school year  100% of those students were males 0   3300 lateness were recorded over the year Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Survey our priorities include:  63% of teachers say that students behave in class when the teacher isn't watching  55% of teachers feel that students try to get good grades  55% of teachers say that discipline is applied to students fairly in their school Our priorities according to our MOTP report 2017 - 2018 are:  3B - Questioning  3D - Assessment  1E - Designing Coherent Instruction 3) Policies and Practices in Place to Supporting the Whole Child are: "Cool Tool" lessons to teach students expected behavior in various settings of the school. SEL team meets bi weekly   We have a Universal Behavior Expectation with tiered behavior supports   6 staff members are are trained in Life Crisis Intervention System (LCIS)  5 staff members are trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention System (TCIS)  We are implementing a "Charter" and "Mood Meter" school wide  We have scheduled 4 "Anti Bullying" presentations  Peer Mediation Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the SEL implementation team, will engage in at least one cycle of inquiry to build an understanding of the importance of social emotional learning competencies and the relationships between social emotional needs and academic outcomes as evidenced by a 5% decrease in the number of student lateness and a 3% decrease in Level 3, 4 and 5 infractions. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Continuously revise Professional Development Plan with the PD team and community Whole staff Parents (SLT) ● Develop PD for Discipline Procedures, MDR's, and positive behavior strategies. ● Social Emotional Support through Book of the Month ● Implementation of RULER from our Yale training to immerse the students in understanding their emotions ● Elicit feedback through school sent staff and student surveys. Monthly PD Meetings Quarterly PD on Mondays Monthly data analysis monthly at SEL Meetings. Scholar Centric Surveys will be given 2X a year Teachers, SEL Implementation Team Administrators, Staff Developer FSC workshops Mental Health Liaison ● Continued Implementation of RULER All students September - June Guidance Counselor, SAPIS worker, SBST Team. Teachers, All staff School Aides ● Bridge to Practice time for Teacher Teams to collaborate All students Subgroups Monday during PD time. Administrators, Guidance Counselor, SEL Team SAPIS worker, SBST Team. Teachers, Administrators, Staff Developer, FSC 2 ● Collaboration and coherence to continue to strengthen trust between Administration, Teachers and outside Staff Developers, Staff and Parents in order to improve our supportive environment All Staff All Students Administration Parents ● Continuation of our P.S. 29 “ROARS” PBIS Team ● Implementation of RULER strategies with students ● Monthly highlighted “ROARS” activities and focus ● Feedback from our Supervisory Inquiry ● Newsletters home to parents Guidance Counselor, SAPIS worker Teachers, Administrators, Staff Developer FSC Guidance Counselor, SAPIS worker SBST Team. At monthly SLT and PTA meetings.Bi weekly PBIS Team meetings. Monthly PBIS focus. Monthly cool tool lessons. Monthly newsletter 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families in understanding Supportive Environment in the following ways: Surveys given 2 times a year November and May to elicit parent needs June 3, 2019 - Pajama Story Time 3 September 27, 2018 - K-2 Literacy and Phonemic Awareness September 17, 2018 - Curriculum Night September 17, 2018 - Parent Orientations  Open door policy of Administration   Daily morning drop off with Administrators, Parents and Parent Coordinator present  Dismissal with Teachers, Administrators and Parent Coordinator present  Continuous outreach to support student success through phone calls and parent meetings  Monthly parent Workshops based on SLT survey:    Monthly parent Workshops based on SLT survey:   October 10, 2018 - Family Fitness Night  October 18, 25 and November 1 - Masterful Parenting Series  October 23, 2018 - Social Emotional Learning  November 13, 2018 - Middle School Night  November 15 2018 - How to Help you Child Organize for Success  November 27, 2018 - Reading and Writing Workshop  December 18, 2018 - Holiday Craft      March 12, 19 and 26 2019 - Masterful Parenting Series  March 19, 2019 - Preparing your Child for the NYS Math and ELA Exams  April 11, 2019 - International Night  May 14, 2019 - Transitioning to the Next Grade  May 28, 2019 - Math, Reading and Writing Summer Challenge  January 22, 2019 - Bullying Parent Workshop January 31, 2019 - Math Game Night February 7, 2019 - Vocabulary: Why is it so important and how do we build it February 28, 2019 Family Science Night   November, March and May Parent Teacher Conferences  Monthly SLT Meetings  Monthly PTA Meetings Staff Responsible: Administrators, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, UFT Staff Developer, Guidance Counselor Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Yale University RULER strategies ● ROARS Matrix ● Ongoing scheduled SEL Team Meetings ● 80 Minute PD on Mondays and Bridge to Practice Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By February 2019, we will analyze the number of lateness and OORS reports to monitor and revise our plan  We will administer an SEL survey to grades 3-5 3X a year to monitor student perception and revise plans with the SEL team Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Report Social Emotional Learning Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) School strengths include the following: Strengths on our Quality Review from 2014-2015 include:  Strong our strong teachers teams who "use an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning". Strengths on 2017-2018 NYC School Survey our strengths include:  100% of teachers talk with one another about instruction  98% of teachers use student's prior knowledge to make their lessons relative to their private life.  98% of teachers design instructional programs (lessons and units) together Our strengths according to our MOTP report 2017 - 2108 are:  2a, Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport we had 97.25% of our teachers receiving E or HE on their observations  2d, Managing Student Behavior we had 90.83% of our teachers receiving E or HE on their observations Our strengths in ELA from the 2017 - 2018 NYS Exam:  A 14% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the ELA which brought us to 54% proficiency level  A 10% decrease in level 1  A 14% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the Economically Disadvantaged  A 4% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Students with Disabilities  A 12% increase in levels 3 and 4 for English Language Learners  A 12% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Males  A 16% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Females  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Hispanic and Latino students Our strengths in Math from the 2017 - 2018 NYS Mathematics Exam:  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Math which brought us to 52% proficiency level  A 4% decrease in level 1  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the Economically Disadvantaged  A 16% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Students with Disabilities  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for English Language Learners  A 9% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Males 5  A 12% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Females  A 8% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Hispanic and Latino students Our strengths on the 2017 - 2018 NYSESLAT include:  86% of our students made gains on the NYSESLAT  14% of ENL students moved 2 or 3 levels on the NYSESLAT 2) Our priority needs include: Our priorities on the NYS 2017-2018 ELA include:  46% of our students are not functioning at proficiency  89% of our Students with Disabilities are at level 1 and 2  82% of our ELL's are at level 1 and 2  54% of our Hispanic and Latino students are performing at level 1 and 2  47% of our economically disadvantaged students are performing at level 1 and 2 Our priorities on the 2017-2018 Mathematics exam include:  48% of our students are not functioning at proficiency  75% of our Students with Disabilities are at level 1 and 2  77% of our ELL's are at level 1 and 2  63% of our Hispanic and Latino students are performing at level 1 and 2  50% of our economically disadvantaged students are performing at level 1 and 2 Priorities on our Quality Review from 2014-2015 include:  2.2: "Align assessments to curricular, use ongoing assessments and grading practices and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels"  1.1: "Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to CCLS and or/ Content Learning Standards" Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Survey our priorities include:  46% of teachers have opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development  76% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try and evaluate new ideas Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYSESLAT analysis our priorities include:   Looking at Expanding students and academic language in content areas where we recognize there is a stall especially amongst grade 3, 4 and 5 students. Focus on "word play" and dissecting academic language to build English Language acquisition and literacy skills  We will continue to focus on oral language development for new comer students in all grade levels. 6  Our priorities according to our MOTP report 2017 - 2018 are:  3B - Questioning  3D - Assessment  1E - Designing Coherent Instruction Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CEP Goal 3: By June 2019 teacher teams across the school will understand student needs and focus on the implementation of strategic reading interventions measured by a 4% increase on the NYS ELA for our most struggling learners including ELLs, SWDs and students performing at Level 1 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  ● Trust will be established by continued dialogue through structured feedback to teachers on observations and feedback from Supervisory Inquiry Teachers Students ● Use of norms and roles in PLC’s ● Professional development on supporting and maintaining strong professional learning communities (PLC’s)  Teacher Team selected inquiry pathways aligned to school wide goals Teachers, Administrators, Staff Developer 4 to 6 times annually. Ongoing PD as needed for PLC's including administrative support. ● Inquiry focus connected with our Instructional Focus on Rigor ● Professional Development on looking at student work protocols, norming protocols and alignment protocols All staff Students Addressed every Monday during PD Mondays. Teachers, Administrators, Staff Developer ● Create a common platform for PD resources for teachers ● Inter visitations ● Vertical and Horizontal team meetings ● Continued refinement of Next Generation Standards common rubrics Vertical team members Students Administration Parents Vertical meetings bi weekly annually. Horizontal team meetings bi weekly annually. Ongoing refinement of rubrics In cycles from September - June: Teachers, Administrators, Staff Developer Parent Coordinator Administrators 8  ● Use of guided reading for small group instruction to improve reading levels ● Fundations in all K - 2 Classrooms Parent Coordinator Teachers 7 week cycles based on needs as needed Teachers Instructional Mentors Students ● Extra Help program before and after school targeted based on need  Use of Orton Gillingham, PRIM, Words Their Way, Readorium, Mindplay, Imagine Learning and Great Leaps  Use of Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) for high need student sub-groups - including cross grade common period for intervention 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families in understanding Collaborative Teaching and Strategies in the following ways: September 17, 2018 - Curriculum Night September 17, 2018 - Parent Orientations September 27, 2018 - K-2 Literacy and Phonemic Awareness  Open door policy of Administration  Continuous outreach to support student success through phone calls and parent meetings  Monthly parent Workshops based on SLT survey:    Monthly parent Workshops based on SLT survey:   October 10, 2018 - Family Fitness Night  October 18, 25 and November 1 - Masterful Parenting Series  October 23, 2018 - Social Emotional Learning  November 13, 2018 - Middle School Night  November 15 2018 - How to Help you Child Organize for Success  November 27, 2018 - Reading and Writing Workshop  December 18, 2018 - Holiday Craft      March 12, 19 and 26, 2019 - Masterful Parenting Series  March 19, 2019 - Preparing your Child for the NYS Math and ELA Exams  April 11, 2019 - International Night  May 14, 2019 - Transitioning to the Next Grade  May 28, 2019 - Math, Reading and Writing Summer Challenge   November, March and May Parent Teacher Conferences  Monthly SLT Meetings January 22, 2019 - Bullying Parent Workshop January 31, 2019 - Math Game Night February 7, 2019 - Vocabulary: Why is it so important and how do we build it February 28, 2019 Family Science Night June 3, 2019 - Pajama Story Time 9   Monthly PTA Meetings Staff Responsible: Administrators, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, UFT Staff Developer, Guidance Counselor Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Various protocols for teacher team work ● Actions plans ● Common rubrics aligned to Next Generation Standards ● Understanding of roles in PLC’s ● Horizontal and Vertical Teams ● Common LLI Time for those identified ● Time on Tuesday afternoons bi- monthly ● Collection of student work and data ● Great Leaps, Ortan Gillingham materials, Readorium materials, Mindplay materials and PRIM's, Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ●By February 2019, we will analyze our mid point i-ready ELA predictive assessment in comparison to the i-ready diagnostic with an expectation of a 2% increase in levels 3 and 4. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. i-ready Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have analyzed the 2017 - 2018 NYS Math assessment data report, the 2017 - 2018 NYS ELA data report, the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Survey, 2017 - 2018 NYSESLAT scores, our final MOTP and our most recent Quality Review. 1)Our school strengths include: Based on the NYS ELA from the 2017 - 2018 we have found:  A 14% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the ELA which brought us to 54% proficiency level  A 10% decrease in level 1  A 14% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the Economically Disadvantaged  A 4% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Students with Disabilities  A 12% increase in levels 3 and 4 for English Language Learners  A 12% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Males  A 16% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Females  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Hispanic and Latino students Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYS Mathematics Exam we have found:  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Math which brought us to 52% proficiency level.  A 4% decrease in level 1  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the Economically Disadvantaged  A 16% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Students with Disabilities  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for English Language Learners  A 9% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Males  A 12% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Females  A 8% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Hispanic and Latino students Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Survey:  91% of teachers say that the Principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals.  93% of teachers say that the Principal sets high standards for student learning Strengths on our Quality Review from 2014-2015 include: 1   Our strong teacher teams who "use an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning". Based on the 2017 -2018 NYC School Survey our strengths include:  Strong Family and Community Ties Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYSESLAT analysis our strengths include:  86% of our students made gains on the NYSESLAT  14% of ENL students moved 2 or 3 levels on the NYSESLAT Our strengths according to our MOTP report 2017 -2018 are:  2a, Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport we had 97.25% of our teachers receiving E or HE on their observations  2d, Managing Student Behavior we had 90.83% of our teachers receiving E or HE on their observations  4e, Growing and Developing Professionally we had 93.58% of our teachers receiving E or HE on their observations 2) Our priorities include the following: Our NYS 2017-2018 ELA priorities include:  46% of teachers have opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development  76% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try and evaluate new ideas  46% of our students are not functioning at proficiency.  89% of our Students with Disabilities are at level 1 and 2.  82% of our ELL's are at level 1 and 2.  54% of our Hispanic and Latino students are performing at level 1 and 2  47% of our economically disadvantaged students are performing at level 1 and 2 Our 2017-2018 Mathematics priorities in Math include:  48% of our students are not functioning at proficiency  75% of our Students with Disabilities are at level 1 and 2.  77% of our ELL's are at level 1 and 2.  63% of our Hispanic and Latino students are performing at level 1 and 2  50% of our economically disadvantaged students are performing at level 1 and 2 Priorities on our Quality Review from 2014-2015 include:  2.2: "Align assessments to curricular, use ongoing assessments and grading practices and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels" 2   1.1: "Ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to CCLS and or/ Content Learning Standards" Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYC School Survey our priorities include:  52% of the teachers say that students respond to challenging test questions  50% of the teachers say that students respond to challenging questions in class  50% of the teachers say that students build on each others ideas for class discussion  74% of the teachers say that they have influence over the development of instructional materials Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYSESLAT analysis our priorities include:   Looking at Expanding students and academic language in content areas where we recognize there is a stall especially amongst grade 3, 4 and 5 students. Focus on "word play" and dissecting academic language to build English Language acquisition and literacy skills  We will continue to focus on oral language development for newcomer students in all grade levels. Our priorities according to our MOTP report 2017 - 2018 are:  3B - Questioning  3D - Assessment  1E - Designing Coherent Instruction Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will implement impactful professional learning cycles around newly learned strategies that promote challenging tasks, questions of high cognitive challenge and content driven discourse in literacy and mathematics resulting in a 20% increase in teachers who are rated highly effective in 3b. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● PD team will revise Professional Development plan to support teachers in growth Teachers PD Team: Bi-Monthly Administrators, Administrators Staff Developer, ● Teacher Teams for peer support ● Teachers will attend Professional Development from TC, FSC, Bank Street and Algebra for All ● Emphasis on data, using and analyzing formative assessments in teacher teams ● Progress monitoring and face to face feedback ● Analyzing NAPE rubric, NCTM checklist, to evaluate rigor in Mathematics ● Book Clubs ● Inter-visitations Teachers ● Individual coaching from Staff Developer Administrators ● Observation cycles inclusive of face to face feedback to encourage dialogue and common understanding of best practices Teachers ● Supervisory Inquiry Teacher Teams: Bi-Weekly TC: Monthly PD TC Staff, PD Team Instructional Mentors FSC: Monthly PD Ongoing Progress Monitoring for face to face Feedback Use of rubric during cycles of learning Inter-Visitations 3X a year in cycles beginning in November ending in May. Ongoing Bi-Weekly Three Times per week Administrators, Staff Developer, TC Staff, PD Team Administrators, Staff Developer, TC Staff, 4  ● Scheduled common planning ● Special Education Meetings ● ELL Meetings ● Literacy and Math Instructional Mentor Meetings ● Parent workshops PD Team Bi-Weekly Administrators, All Staff, Parents Staff Developer, TC Staff, PD Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage families in understanding Effective School Leadership in the following ways: September 17, 2018 - Curriculum Night September 17, 2018 - Parent Orientations September 27, 2018 - K-2 Literacy and Phonemic Awareness  Open door policy of Administration  Continuous outreach to support student success through phone calls and parent meetings  Monthly parent Workshops based on SLT survey:    Monthly parent Workshops based on SLT survey:   October 10, 2018 - Family Fitness Night  October 18, 25 and November 1 - Masterful Parenting Series  October 23, 2018 - Social Emotional Learning  November 13, 2018 - Middle School Night  November 15 2018 - How to Help you Child Organize for Success  November 27, 2018 - Reading and Writing Workshop  December 18, 2018 - Holiday Craft      March 12, 19 and 26, 2109 - Masterful Parenting Series  March 19, 2019 - Preparing your Child for the NYS Math and ELA Exams  April 11, 2019 - International Night  May 14, 2019 - Transitioning to the Next Grade  May 28, 2019 - Math, Reading and Writing Summer Challenge   November, March and May Parent Teacher Conferences  Monthly SLT Meetings January 22, 2019 - Bullying Parent Workshop January 31, 2019 - Math Game Night February 7, 2019 - Vocabulary: Why is it so important and how do we build it February 28, 2019 - Family Science Night June 3, 2019 - Pajama Story Time 5   Monthly PTA Meetings Staff Responsible: Administrators, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator, UFT Staff Developer, Guidance Counselor Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Guided Reading kits, Leveled Literacy Intervention kits to support high need sub groups ● Readorium materials, MindPlay materials ● Imagine Learning for beginner ELL’s and struggling learners Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● By February 2019, all teachers will have improved their practice in 3b by 10% as measured by Advance Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After conversations with parents during Parent Advisory, during SLT and PTA meetings, as well as feedback to our Parent Coordinator, it is evident that we need to continue to support our communication and outreach with our entire community to increase opportunities for involvement. Additionally in our Quality Review Feedback form the 2014-2015 Quality Review, parents asked for support and information in academic progress and monitoring for their children. 1) Our strengths include: Based on the NYC 2017 -2018 School Survey our strengths include:  100% of families say that the school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand  100% of families say that they feel respected by their child's principal  99% of families say that they feel well informed by the communications they receive from their school  99% of families say that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit their school  98% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn  96% of teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet student needs Based on the NYS ELA from the 2017 - 2018 we have found:  A 14% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the ELA which brought us to 54% proficiency level  A 10% decrease in level 1  A 14% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the Economically Disadvantaged  A 4% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Students with Disabilities  A 12% increase in levels 3 and 4 for English Language Learners  A 12% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Males  A 16% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Females  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Hispanic and Latino students Based on the 2017 - 2018 NYS Mathematics Exam we have found:  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Math which brought us to 52% proficiency level.  A 4% decrease in level 1  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for the Economically Disadvantaged  A 16% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Students with Disabilities  A 11% increase in levels 3 and 4 for English Language Learners  A 9% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Males  A 12% increase of levels 3 and 4 for Females 7   A 8% increase in levels 3 and 4 for Hispanic and Latino students Parents have verbalized that they feel more welcome in the school and attendance at events such as Pajama Story Night, the Social Studies Fair, and the Science Fair, International Night and Family Fitness Night are very high. 2) Our priorities include: Based on the NYC 2017 -2018 School Survey our priorities include:  78% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom  71% of families say they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school Our NYS 2017-2018 ELA priorities include:  46% of teachers have opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development  76% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try and evaluate new ideas  46% of our students are not functioning at proficiency  89% of our Students with Disabilities are at level 1 and 2  82% of our ELL's are at level 1 and 2  54% of our Hispanic and Latino students are performing at level 1 and 2  47% of our economically disadvantaged students are performing at level 1 and 2 Our 2017-2018 Mathematics priorities in Math include:  48% of our students are not functioning at proficiency  75% of our Students with Disabilities are at level 1 and 2  77% of our ELL's are at level 1 and 2  63% of our Hispanic and Latino students are performing at level 1 and 2  50% of our economically disadvantaged students are performing at level 1 and 2 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, our parent coordinator and the school community will work to improve family engagement by empowering parents through workshops aligned to family needs that support the academic and social emotional development of their children as evidenced by a 3% increase on the NYS ELA and Mathematics assessments. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  ● Home School Visits ● Continued partnership with the CASA grant through Poppenhussen Institute ● Partnership with College Point Community Center ● Masterful Parenting Workshop Series ● Book Clubs for parents ● Parent Advisory Committee to help form trust and hear voices from additional parents ● Parents as Reading Partners in Kindergarten ● Pre-K parent involvement time ● Access to i-ready Assessment ● Use of Imagine Learning, Great Leaps, Readorium and Mindplay to fill in learning gaps ● Parent workshops on Next Generation Standards Parents ● Parent workshops on social emotional health Students ● Pre-K Reading Challenge Staff ● Pajama Story Night to encourage literacy Community ● STEM fair 9 Parents Students Staff Community Poppenhussen: Daily Administrators, College Point Community Center: Monthly Staff Developer, Guidance Counselor, SAPIS worker, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Community Partnerships Parents PA: Administrators, Students PARP: Staff Community Staff Developer, Guidance Counselor, SAPIS worker, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Community Partnerships Administrators, Staff Developer, Guidance Counselor, SAPIS worker, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Community Partnerships Pre-K: Daily imagine learning: Ongoing Readorium: Ongoing Mindplay: Ongoing Parent Workshops: Bi-Weekly Pre-K Reading Challenge: Yearly PJ Night: Yearly ● International Night- celebrating our diverse community ● Evening ESL workshops for parents on a weekly basis ● School wide plays ● Collaboration of morning arrivals with parent and administrator drop off team Science Fair: Yearly School Wide Plays: Monthly AM Drop Off: Daily ● Implementation of Learning Ally - On line book share portal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Masterful Parenting Training and Workshop Series by Parent Coordinator Popenhussen QTELL College Point Community Senior Center Popenhussen Library NYPD Collaboration from 109th Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Computers ● Money for Book club for parents MP3 Players   Props Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will analyze our mid point i-ready ELA and Math predictive assesment in comparison to the 0  i-ready diagnostic with an expectation of a 2% increase in levels 3 and 4. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. i-ready Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELAData Median Scale scoreand below: Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group Coaching Before school Guided Instruction Push In During school Grade 3: 305 Strategy Groups Pull Out After school Grade 4: 303 LLI Small Group Grade 5: 304 Guided Reading One-to-One MOSL Assessments Extra Help Program Online EDATtool i-ready STAR Assessment Imagine Learning Running Records Readorium Benchmark Assessments Pre and Post Classroom Assessments NYS MathData Median Scale scoreand below: Mathematics Mindplay Focused Reading Intervention Ready instruction books Small Group Coaching Before school Guided Instruction Push In During school Grade 3: 299 Strategy Groups Pull Out After school Grade 4: 298 Extra Help Program Small Group Grade 5: 306 i-Ready One-to-One 2  Science MOSL Assessments EDATtool Ready instruction books Online Lab classes Coaching Before school Differentiated instruction Trade Books Content based reading and writing based on CCLS During school After school Push In Pull Out Small Group One-to-One Online STAR Assessment in grades 3-5 Benchmark Assessments Pre and Post Classroom Assessments NYS Science Exams NYS MathData Median Scale scoreand below: Grade 3: 299 Grade 4: 298 Grade 5: 306 NYS ELAData Median Scale scoreand below: Grade 3: 305 Grade 4: 303 Grade 5: 304 MOSL Assessments Running records Benchmark Assessments Pre and Post Classroom Assessments Social Studies NYS ELAData Median Scale scoreand below: Differentiated instruction Small group work Coaching Before school Push In During school 3 Grade 3: 305 Trade Books Pull Out After school Grade 4: 303 Grade 5: 304 Content based reading and writing based on CCLS Small Group One-to-One Running records Online Benchmark Assessments Pre and Post Classroom Assessments based on Passport for Social Studies Curriculum Gift forms to the PPT/RTI team Parent requests Teacher Recommendations At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PBIS Coaching During school RTI strategies Push In RULER strategies Pull Out Power of One Small Group The Ned Show One-to-One 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 32 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Purchase of:  Book bags  Paying for trips  winter apparel   Meet regularly with families to see how they are and what supports they need Included in Extra Help support Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  Purchase of:  Book bags  Uniforms  providing snack  Pay for trips   Meet regularly with families to see how they are and what supports they need Included in Extra Help support 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Title 1 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our staff currently has 100% of our teachers who are HQT. Strategic scheduling of teachers, providing professional development and support on Monday afternoons, including time to engage in professional learning on Tuesday afternoons in Professional Learning Communities with a focus on alignment of curriculum, assessment and instruction to the instructional shifts demanded by the Next Generation Standards. Additionally: ● Before we interview we select teachers who are licensed in specific areas of need. Additionally we have a supportive environment where we show our appreciation for their hard work. We have initiated a panel for a hiring committee for our new hires ● We use New Teacher Finder to determine those who are recommended and passed screening by the DOE ● We have Mentors for New Teachers as well as monthly new teacher school based meetings in the building 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Professional development in Mathematics and ELA, which supports our Instructional Focus :” Deepening our work in grounding reading, writing, thinking and discussion in evidence across content areas” and the Citywide Instructional Expectations ● Multiple common preps weekly for planning and collaboration ● Ongoing professional development on the Danielson Framework. 7  ● Professional learning around the alignment of curriculum, assessment and instruction to create tasks and questions that are aligned to the Next Generation Standards ● Ongoing staff development, including planning and modeling from Teachers College, to support Literacy, and support in Mathematics instruction from Generation Ready. ● Workshops at Teachers College ● Principal Meetings at Teachers College ● District Assistant Principal and Principal Meetings ● District 25 Professional Learning Community ● Participation in citywide, BFSC and district wide cohort professional development ● Participation in UFT Teacher Center professional development ● Teacher PLC's related to our CEP goals Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We have two full day Pre-Kindergarten classes who utilize the Work Sampling assessment which is in alignment to the CCSS. The parents are in the school participating with their children once a month for a hands on activity in the classroom. All Pre-Kindergarten families attend PTA meetings and students are honored for Student of the Month. Pre-Kindergarten teachers share information with Kindergarten teachers about successes and areas of concern. Additionally both Pre-K teachers as well as the principal will attend a two day training this summer about the new 8  curriculum. This year we also had the Pre-K center bring their incoming students to our school on June 18, 2018 to prepare them for nest year. This visit included a tour of the school and visits to the Kindergarten classrooms. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet regularly with Staff Developers and Administration to work on content area planning and assessments. Our Coach also meets regularly during common planning time to discuss pre and post assessments for each unit of study. Teachers were a part of the selection committee to select the Measures of Student Learning for our school. Additionally, where applicable, teachers will meet with Administration to discuss the data from the NYS Math and ELA exams, looking for trends and next steps to improve instruction and student outcomes. We have also implemented a grading policy committee to ensure coherence across in our academic policies 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d & 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d & 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d & 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d & 5e 5a, 5b, 5d & 5e Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 358,870.00 21546.00 26,702.00 7192.00 4,353,818.00 X X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 9  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 29, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 29 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding CCLS and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 3  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 29, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 4  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 5  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 6  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 7  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III funding for school year 2018-19 will help us provide additional support to our English Language Learners during a four day morning program and/or a twice a week after school program. Targeted students from grades 2 through 5 will be identified using NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, NYS ELA exam and current reading levels. One Title III program will combine arts, STEM and journalism to enhance students' language development in all modalities. This program will be offered to targeted English Language Learners in grades 2- 5. ENL teachers will deliver instruction in English, linking the different media to the classroom curriculum and expectations of the Next Generation Standards. Students will be placed in 3 classes of approximately 10-15 students with each class serviced by a New York State certified ENL teacher and content area teacher. Students will use a variety of materials including Science and Engineering tools, ipads, and newspapers. Entering and emerging ELLs will also benefit from using MP3 players to listen to the same books on audio that the rest of their group is reading. This technology will help to provide a scaffold for these students to participate in discussions and project-based learning. By the end of this program, students will know and/or be able to embody a full understanding of English vocabulary used in science, technology and class discussions, respond verbally with less hesitation and in a manner that logically makes sense, contribute their ideas to the group confidently, participate fully while challenging themselves to take risks, expand general English vocabulary to add to other student's ideas and provide/accept feedback. Additionally, we will provide AIS afterschool and morning programs to accommodate ELLs in grades 2-5 who need extra help in literacy and math. These AIS programs will be structured into two five week cycles. Each cycle will meet two days per week after school for two hours each session and will focus on meeting the needs of the students as per NYSESLAT, Fountas and Pinnell levels, STAR assessment data and student work and teacher feedback. Classes will be organized to target student's areas of need as determined by the assessment data in NYS ELA and NYS Mathematics. The first cycle of AIS will focus on ELLs who are stalled at the transitioning and expanding levels. The second cycle will focus on ELLs who are struggling with reading and reading below the grade by 2 or more levels. The third cycle will focus on ELLs who scored 2 on the 2018 ELA/Math tests and all students who are taking the tests for the first time. Instruction will be delivered by certified ENL teachers. The anticipated number of students served will be 240 students, receiving instruction from approximately 6 teachers; 3 ENL certified teachers and 3 general education teachers.. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 0  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: All ENL teachers, Deborah Ilberg, Monica Torres, James Williams, Tracy Cagnard, Katherine Malandrakis and Adriana Ammerman are New York State certified teachers. Content teachers, Alyssa Seabury, Jenna Schiffman, and Caitlin Conway are are New York State certified teachers who will work in collaboration with our ENL teachers to deliver language rich lessons to all students in the afterschool program. Teachers continue to attend on- site and off-site professional development in the Units of Study for Reading and Writing Workshops given by Teachers College, participating in Maryann Cucchiarra’s ENL cohort in D25 and ENL professional development opportunities offered through the DELLS and the FSC. Many of the workshops that teachers attend are related to teaching content area to ENL students. All teachers have been trained in using Fountas and Pinnell, TPR and Imagine Learning (technology). Working collaboratively, the teachers will explore best practices and next steps in instruction by examining student work using the Next Generation Standards as a guide. Staff will receive professional development from our in house ENL staff during our cycles of professional learning. Throughout the year, staff will receive targeted PD to assist in language learning theory and practice. Information and techniques gathered from outside professional development will be shared and discussed. Teachers will be given resources and supports to assist them in their classroom teaching and understanding of their ENL students. ENL teachers giving professional development to other staff members in house will continue to engae in professional development for themselves by attending and participating in ENL cohort work for D25, through Teacher's College workshops and professional workshops opportunities offered by the FSC and the DELLS. Professional development cycles are ongoing and will run throughout the entire year. These cycles will positively impact the progress of ENL students by having teachers of ENL students engage in professional readings and discussions, intervisitations and related best practices for English Language learning. In turn, teachers who are informed, up to date and develop expertise in the area of ENL instruction will enhance the education and instruction for all students in their classroom. All meeting agendas and attendance will be maintained by the ENL staff and kept on file in the ENL office. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent engagement activities will be designed and coordinated through the collaboration among the teachers, the supervisor and the school's parent coordinator. Two one hour workshops will be 1 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities offered to parents, who will be notified by letter/invitation. The focus of the first workshop will be to introduce the program and explain how an enrichment program will benefit the students. The second workshop will take place toward the end of the after school program and will include families working together on a project. During this culminating activity, children will share with their families the work completed in the afterschool program. PS29 partner teachers, as well as the program supervisor, will present to parents the processes and goals of the program. Translators will be available. A letter home is sent in English, Chinese and Spanish notifying parents of the parent involvement sessions. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 20364 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Borough Queens School Number 029 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jill Leakey-Eisenberg Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Deborah Ilberg Teacher/Subject Area James Williams/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Monica Torres/ENL Related-Service Provider Danielle Nuzzi/AIS Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Suzanne Miller Coach type here School Counselor Kimberly Blustein Parent Terri Ortiz Parent Coordinator Maria Ortiz Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Vasiliou Rozos Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 7 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 725 3 Total number of ELLs 244 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 33.66%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. SP School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-2019 K 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fountas and Pinnell is used to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. This data is used to inform individual and class progress. Periodic assessments are used by teachers to analyze results, determine growth in benchmark instructional and independent reading levels, identify intervention groups, define and implement academic improvement plans and monitor student progress. Initial NYSITELL and yearly NYSESLAT data reveals that speaking and writing are areas of challenge for many of our students. This finding is supported by the F&P running records data collected quarterly by the teachers. In addition, data from Imagine Learning and Bright Fish online programs shows that our ENL students are making progress in their Reading skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 4  To support our formative assessment practices we: 1. Collect and analyze Running Record data in a tracking system four times over the course of the year. This is done individually by classroom teachers. The data is submitted to the assistant principal for review during administrative cabinet. The data is also presented to the staff to review, discuss trends and note areas in need of improvement. Collectively, strategies and next steps are identified and agreed upon by the cabinet and staff . 2. Complete cycles of Guided Reading based on level. All classroom teachers are using Guided reading in their classrooms during their literacy block. Groups are strategically formed using assessment data. Guided reading AIS support is also given to our most struggling readers by the AIS provider in 5-6 week cycles. 3. Complete cycles of the Leveled Literacy Intervention program organized by current reading level. LLI intervention is delivered in 5-6 week cycles to students who have been identified as needing additional intervention beyond the classroom guided reading small group instruction. Additionally, 5 classes will take part in computer based reading intervention programs. Readorium will be implemented in our fourth and fifth grade ENL classrooms and Mind Play will be implemented in our third grade ENL classrooms. 4. Curriculum pre/post assessments. 5. Student observations 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We administer baseline, formative and summative assessments throughout the school year. These assessments, along with the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL, provide us with valuable information to evaluate students' progress and, therefore, the success of our ENL program. Periodic assessments will also be administered in the Readorium and Mind Play programs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures that we have in place to address interventions are: 1. At Risk Support 2. AM/PM Extra Help program 3. ENL Afterschool programs 4. Small Group Guided Reading and LLI 5. PPT Student Discussions 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The ENL team uses data from Home Language Information Surveys, NYSITELL, Fountas and Pinnell Reading Tracker as well as NYSESLAT, ELA and Math results and classroom observations to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework. Students' home language and educational background is taken into account. The student’s progress is compared with levels demonstrated by peers from comparable cultural, linguistic, and experiential backgrounds who have received the same or comparable intervention. Knowledge of typical second language development and the student’s history of first and second language is considered when setting benchmarks and interpreting progress. When evaluating instructional programs for students, we gauge achievement levels for the school's overall population and for ELLs using all available data. This gives an indication of how individual students are doing compared to their local and national peers. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results, % of our ELLs are Entering, % are Emerging, % are Transitioning, % are Expanding and % are Commanding. According to NYSITELL results for Kindergarten, 5% of ELLS are Entering, 14% are Emerging, 7% Transitioning, 58% are Expanding and 17% are Commanding. According to NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, 6% of 1st graders are Entering, 9% are Emerging, 17% are Transitioning, 40% Expanding, and 29% are Commanding . In 2nd grade, 5% are Entering, 10% are Emerging, 12% are Transitioning, 57% are Expanding and 17% are Commanding. In 3rd grade, 23% of ELLs are Entering, 27% are Emerging, 23% are Transitioning, 19% are Expanding and 8% are Commanding. In 4th grade, 8% of 5  ELLs are Entering, 13% are Emerging, 13% are Transitioning, 31% are Expanding and 30% are Commanding. In 5th grade, 9% of ELLs are Entering, 14% are Emerging, 0% are Transitioning, 72% are Expanding and 5% are Commanding. Overall, the majority of our ELLs are at the expanding level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Current structures that are utilized to disseminate these findings are: 1. Administrative Cabinet Meetings 2. ENL Team Discussions at Vertical team meetings 3. Re-Organization for future class 4. Professional Development Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Stand-alone ENL instruction develops English language skills so that students can succeed in core content areas. It is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. Students do not receive stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction. Integrated ENL instruction builds English language skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-taught by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher (i.e., English language arts, math, science, or social studies). Both methods of integrated ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. All ELLs and former ELLs up to 2 years after exiting ELL status receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL service. Students are grouped by grade and are at mixed proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Our school did not have sufficient students to support the opening of a TBE program at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. We do not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We have three full time ENL teachers who provide stand-alone and integrated ENL services. We also have several dually certified teachers who teach self-contained ENL classes. Students who are at the entering proficiency level receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction as required under the CR Part 154 mandate. 180 of these minutes are stand alone ENL and the other 180 minutes are integrated ENL/ELA. Students who are at the emerging proficiency level also receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction. 90 of these minutes are stand alone ENL and 180 minutes are integrated ENL/ELA. The other 90 minutes of ENL instruction is flexible according to student needs. Students who are at the transitioning proficiency level receive 180 minutes per week of ENL instruction. 90 of these minutes are integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes are flexible according to student needs. Students at the expanding proficiency level receive 180 minutes per week of integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Students at the commanding level receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction and support for an 6  additional two years, provided by an ENL teacher. All ENL classes, including Integrated and Stand-alone, offer home language support. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In content areas, English Language Learners are taught academic vocabulary and grammatical structures that often interfere with comprehension of content area material. ENL teachers guide students to deconstruct and reconstruct sentences through close reading. Teachers also use visuals and realia while teaching students to distinguish shades of meaning among related words. Teachers scaffold language demands to support development of syntax as well as general and domain-specific academic vocabulary connected to the content area learning in the classroom. Instructional strategies also include providing opportunities for high-quality discussions and developing the skill of using evidence to support arguments in those discussions. This skill will transfer to stronger writing in literacy and math. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Home language support is provided for our ELL students. Students have access to bilingual content-area dictionaries and there is native language communication during instruction between peer translators and/or school staff where possible (paraprofessionals, teachers). Teachers also make use of cognates where possible, appropriate for their students, based on content and grade. We have multilingual books available to our ELLs. In addition, our Spanish-speaking ELLs are assessed using the Spanish LAB. ENL teachers assist students in making word cards that have an English word on one side with the translation in the student's native language on the other. Beginning students are also encouraged to write in their native language during Writing Workshop, reading response and when explaining their work in Math. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our students with interrupted formal education are serviced in strategically-planned small groups and given additional instructional supports selected by the ENL teachers. Careful attention is given to the support of these students in test taking as they are required to take state tests after only one year of residency in the United States. SIFE students taking state exams are provided with testing accommodations that may include taking the test in a separate location, extended time and, on certain tests, native language test booklets and/or translators. When appropriate, students are provided with instruction on using glossaries in their native language, when allowable on certain state tests. ENL teachers provide additional support for our population of Newcomers by providing these students with additional supports in developing social and academic language as well as providing additional literacy instruction. Newcomers receive 2-4 periods of ENL small group instruction each week. Newcomers taking state exams are provided with testing accommodations that may include taking the test in a separate location, extended time and, on certain tests, native language test booklets and/or translators. When appropriate, students are provided with instruction on using glossaries in their native language, when allowable on certain state tests. Developing ELL student progress is carefully monitored, in an effort to avoid "stall". Students who continue to fall behind in their reading progress are identified to the ENL team as well as the cabinet for consideration of AIS reading services. When/if appropriate, these students receive AIS reading instruction as part of our RTI plan. In planning for our long term ELLs, we have decided as a team to look carefully at all the data we have on the particular student(s) and determine which areas these children need the most support in and provide them with AIS services, as part of our AIS plan. ENL teachers will provide instruction for all ENL students using a myriad of ENL strategies. Some children may be offered 7  Academic Intervention Services to help them overcome their academic challenges. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of instruction each week during content area lessons as well as accommodations on all assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs with special needs will be provided with ENL services as dictated by their Individualized Educational Plan. All instructional strategies and grade-level materials are differentiated and delivered to students through small group work and individual conferencing. Teachers use manipulatives, visuals, graphic organizers and read alouds to model teaching points and scaffold vocabulary. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teachers both push into classrooms and pull ELL-SWDs out of the classrooms to deliver instruction in flexible, small groups. The ENL teachers are knowledgeable of each student's Individualized Educational Plan and goals. Students whose IEPs state that they are to receive bilingual instruction have a language paraprofessional (with their native language) to ensure an appropriate program and instruction. The service provider uses the Teacher's College units of study and adapts the curriculum with ENL strategies and techniques as well as supports the students according to their specific needs as stated on their IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs receive scaffolded instruction in all content areas. Activities to enable ELLs to reach high standards in math include hands-on opportunities such as manipulatives, games, exemplars, and guided math groups. Oral language is strengthened through the Let‘s Talk About It Program. Content area literature in Social Studies and Science is provided for ELL students to coordinate with the studies in their classroom. The state science assessment results indicate that hands on activities coordinated with intense vocabulary development in science content area are benefiting our English Language Learners. We will continue to concentrate on supporting science learning for the ELL students through a focus on activating prior knowledge, using graphic organizers, and small group instruction to build the students‘ schema. Academic language is developed through students participating in small group, task-oriented situations that guide the production of language both in verbal and written form. Teachers use visuals and deconstruction of complex texts to support students‘ knowledge of academic content. Teaching materials include a wide range of print, visual and digital resources designed to increase English language proficiency. Language functions and structures are taught within the context of the lesson. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our overall school focus is to improve student-to-student discussion as well as align all instruction to the Next Generation Learning Standards. There will be a four cycle AIS AM/PM program to address the needs of our students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have no plans to discontinue any of the programs or services that we offer to ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have equal access to all school programs. Students who need additonal support are provided with SETTS services, guidance and speech. Our English Language Learners participate in all school programs, both curricular and extracurricular. ELLs participate in our school chorus, the basketball and cheerleading teams, the school government, Arts Connections, monthly parent and child crafts, drama, visual arts and gym as well as the afterschool programs provided by our local 8  Poppenhusen Institute. ELLs are invited through letters in English and in their native languages in addition to verbal communications with parents. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our goal is to develop academic language with students participating in small group, task-oriented situations that guide the production of language both in verbal and written form. Language functions and structures are taught within the context of the lesson. Activating students' prior knowledge, graphic organizers and visuals are used to build the students‘ schema. Materials that provide hands-on opportunities, such as manipulatives, games, and exemplars are utilized to support our ELLs. Teachers use visuals, graphic organizers and deconstructing and reconstructing of complex sentences to support students‘ knowledge of the main academic content. Teaching materials include a wide range of print, visual and digital resources designed for increasing English language proficiency. Almost every classroom has a Smart/Promethean Board, which is used to engage the students and support their learning. Oral language is strengthened through rich class discussion and the Let‘s Talk About It Program, in the afterschool program. Content area literature in Social Studies and Science is provided for the ELL students that coordinates with the studies in their classroom. The state science assessment results indicate that hands on activities coordinated with intense vocabulary development in science content area is necessary. We concentrate on supporting science learning for the ELL students. ELLs have access to educational websites such as starfall.com, readingatoz.com, brainpopjr.com and scholastic.com, to name a few. In addition, we currently have forty licenses used by our newcomer ELLs in grades 2-5 for Imagine Learning. This provides technology-based learning and support. Students in grades 3-5 will receive additional support through the computer based programs Readorium and Mind Play. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided for ELLs in our school. All classroom libraries contain trade books in a variety of languages for our students. Standardized tests are provided in a variety of languages and translators have been hired to assist with the tests. Our Parent Coordinator speaks Spanish and our physical therapist speaks Mandarin. Both are able to assist the students whenever needed. Students whose IEPs state that they are to receive bilingual instruction have a language paraprofessional to ensure an appropriate program and instruction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services and resources are carefully planned and selected to correspond to ELLs' ages and grade level standards. All ENL teachers carefully plan with each grade level team to select age and grade level appropriate materials and resources. In ELA, students are instructed through the Teachers' College Reading and Writing Program and read books on their independent reading levels. Students' age, grade level and English proficiency is carefully considered when choosing vocabulary, structures and language prompts specific to the unit being taught. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not share a building with another school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). One of our three certified ENL teachers or the assistant principal is present at every students' registration to complete the informal interview. During this interview, the ENL teacher/AP screens each newly enrolled ELL student. Our parent coordinator is introduced to the student and their family at this time and all parent questions and concerns are addressed by this team. The school secretary reviews school procedures with the family and student, taking a school visit before students begin their first day of school. There are no activities offered before the beginning of the school year. 9  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is provided on an ongoing basis for our ENL teachers and classroom teachers who provide ENL instruction for their students. ENL meetings are led by our ENL teachers, to discuss ENL methodologies and best practices, as well as align ENL strategies with the Next Generation Learning standards. Teachers attend District 25 professional development opportunities and ENL workshops. Materials distributed in these workshops are kept in the ENL room for all personnel to utilize. Teachers also have the opportunity to attend Teacher's College workshops specific to ENL methodologies and meet with our Teachers College staff developers. At our ENL meetings, ENL staff work together to analyze Next GenerationLearning Standards and align them with ENL strategies and goals. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers are provided with professional development in how to prepare students for the transition from elementary to middle school. We provide ELL-specific professional development through study groups, workshops and lab sites, and ENL meetings. Our ENL teachers model lessons including strategies that are beneficial to English Language Learners. Records of teacher attendance at ELL training are maintained in the ENL office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We meet individually with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year,during parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, during the contracted Tuesday afternoon parent communication time, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. All meetings may include the school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language 0  development in all content areas in English. When necessary, meetings are conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Attendance records are maintained in the ENL office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement in our school includes, but is not limited to, coffee and conversation workshops, the school leadership team, the parent/teacher association, ENL parent orientations, monthly parent and child crafts, assemblies, open school week, monthly movie nights, parents as reading partners, international night as well as free adult evening ENL classes. Specific events this year include parent/teacher volleyball and kickball and the Science Extravaganza. Parents are informed of these activities through fliers that are translated into Spanish and Chinese. Translators are also available at these activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jill Leakey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: ps 29Q School DBN: 25Q029 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jill Leakey Eisenberg Title Principal Suzanne Miller/AP/ENL Assistant Principal Maria Ortiz Parent Coordinator Deborah Ilberg ENL/Bilingual Teacher Terri Ortiz Parent Monica Torres/ENL Teacher/Subject Area James Williams/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Danielle Nuzzi/AIS Coach Coach Kimberly Bluestein School Counselor Danielle DiMango Maria Vasiliou Rozos Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q029 School Name: PS 029 Superintendent: DanielleDiMango The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maria Ortiz Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, every parent fills out a Home Language Identification Survey, which asks in Part III what language the parent would like to receive written information and oral communication from the school. School ENL staff and/or the Assistant Principal in charge of ENL is present during this process to ensure that parents understand the form and to answer any questions that the parent may have while completing this document. This data is collected and entered into ATS by the secretary after the OTELE (language) code has been assigned by an ENL pedagogue. At registration parents also fill out an emergency card where they state what language they prefer to be contacted in for written and oral communication. We also denote this information on a personalized PS 29 intake form. 4  Notices are sent home with check off boxes for translators, especially for report card conferences and Parent Engagement days, 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Chinese Arabic Pashto Farsi Korean Phillipino Burmese Greek Turkish Urdu Ukranian 326 318 182 11 9 7 6 4 2 1 1 1 1 37.4% 36.5 21.0 1.2% 1.0% 0.8% 0.6% 0.4% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 328 312 166 11 9 8 6 4 1 1 1 1 1 37.6% 35.8 19.0 1.2% 1.0% 0.9% 0.6% 0.4% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish, English, Chinese Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 5  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you plan to translate? Include Distributed to procedures to ensure timely provision of Families translated documents to parents. School wide informational documents monthly calendars monthly workshop notices monthly In house translation; staff members proficient in Spanish and Chinese assist in translating for our school's needs; oral and written In house translatioIn house translation; staff members proficient in Spanish and Chinese assist in translating for our school's needs; oral and written registration documents ongoing NYC DOE translated 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent workshops and school-wide celebrations: International Night, Pajama Storytime, Family Fitness Night Back to school/meet the teacher night Parent-teacher conferences Monthly September November March May ENL parent orientation Parents as Reading Partners September and ongoing Ongoing Annual individual ENL progress meeting Fall and Spring interpretation service(s)? In house staff who provide translation in Spanish, Chinese and Korean Telephone translation services are also used Translators are hired for these events In house staff who provide translation in Spanish, Chinese and Korean Telephone translation services are also used In house staff who provide translation in Spanish, Chinese and Korean Telephone translation services are also used 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 6  School phone relay that provides translation services. All teachers and staff members have been provided with the Translation Service number that they can use for any and all communication needs. Fliers are translated in house if needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In the beginning of the year notes, teachers are informed of Chancellors Regulation A-663 and are provided with the Translation Unit number to use with their parents throughout all communication during the year. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome Poster hangs in the main vestibule of our building. In addition, the language ID guide and Parents' Bill of Rights are displayed in our Parent Coordinator's Office. Parent engagement letters go home in parent's preferred language and follow up phone calls are made in the parent's native language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will provide parents with a survey at the end of the school year in their preferred language inquiring about the quality and availability of services. 7 
