 29Q052 School Name: P.S. 052 QUEENS Principal: FRANCESCA JOSEPH   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P. S. 52 Queens 342900010052 Pre K - 5 School Number (DBN): 29Q052 178-37 146 th Terrace, Jamaica, NY 11434 718-528-2238 718-276-2854 Phone Number: Fax: Francesca Joseph-Fleurant fjoseph5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Francesca Joseph-Fleurant Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Gail Jordan-Gold Anasthasia Mentis Joanne Helenese-Barnett SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: JulissaPrimus n/a n/a n/a District Information Ms. Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: CSD 29 90-11 191st Street, Room 122, Hollis, NY 11423 Bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-217-7740 EXT. 1223 (718) 217-7739 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   South Queens FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 8201 Rockaway Blvd. Queens, NY 11416 mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-348-2928 Phone Number: (718) 264-3146 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joanne Helenese-Barnett Teacher/Chairperson Veronica Best Robin Dexter Teacher Teacher  Name Francesca Joseph-Fleurant Gail Jordan-Gold AnasthasiaMentis Edith Frye JulissaPrimus n/a n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) George Bishop LaKieshaBun-Bios Rachel Gibbs Precious Bunkley Robert Primus Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview “ WE CANNOT BECOME WHAT WE NEED TO BE BY REMAINING WHAT WE ARE.” Max DePree   It is our mission as educators to prepare all of our students to meet and exceed all established Performance Standards. We are striving to gain recognition as a school of excellence in achievement and character. By providing a learning environment that is safe and nurturing, our students will become life-long learners with goals of achieving excellence in all their endeavors. We will work with parents and the total community to produce well rounded students that are capable and socially conscious of their unique importance to our society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 52Q is a four story brick structure that was constructed in 1926 . P.S. 52Q is located in the Southeastern Queens community of Springfield Gardens adjacent to Kennedy Airport amidst an area of private homes, multiple dwellings, and commercial/industrial buildings. P.S. 52 services 394 students in grades PreK-5. Our school is located several blocks away from four temporary housing facilities who we partner with to best serve a population of students who reside in temporary housing. Many of our students reside with families caring for them in foster homes which contribute to a mobility rate that is greater than 15% and an attendance rate that is approximately 92%. We are a diverse staff that works collaboratively toward a common goal. Our staff has a vested interest in the school-wide goals and objectives and is committed to working toward improving student achievement. Our greatest accomplishment as a school community is our ability to collaborate across grades (vertically and horizontally) planning to address student needs and move our students forward. Instructional Background ELA and Mathematics ¨ We are a school in good standing in ELA, Science and Mathematics. ¨ Our staff utilizes a combination of the Teachers College Reading and Writing program, the Teaching Matters Writing program, Early Reading Matters (Teaching Matters), Achieve 3000, Fundations and our own teacher–created supplemental enhancements to implement reading and writing units of study throughout the school year. ¨ We have utilized the Envision Mathematics program since the 2012-2013 school year. We have supplemented our Mathematics program with an on-line mathematics program called Mathletics since the beginning of the 2016-2017 school-year. All students in grades kindergarten through fifth grade utilize the program during the school day and were provided a password to utilize the program after-school as well. ¨ All of the students in grades two through five are programmed twice per week to utilize a reading program called Achieve 3000. Achieve 3000 is a web based, non-fiction reading program that assists us with differentiating our reading instruction. Each student receives a daily e-mail reading assignment that aligns to his/her own Lexile reading level. Teachers and students are provided with immediate feedback. Teachers can utilize data immediately for monitoring student progress and drive future instruction. This program also offers home practice. STEAM ¨ PS 52 was fortunate to receive a United Stated Federal Magnet Grant for Innovations in Engineering, for two million dollars. The effective date of the grant was October 1, 2016. The grant will be effective until September, 2020. We have expanded our science/engineering program and currently utilize cluster teachers to teach our STEAM (science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics) to students in grades kindergarten through five. ¨ During the 2013 -2014 we began expanding our STEM education program. We added arts to our program and changed our focus to STEAM. All students in grades Pre-Kindergarten through grade five are taught and have access to Engineering instruction. We utilized the engineering design concepts to implement and enhance a rigorous STEAM 0  Education program that is designed with the Next Generation Science Standards. With the assistance of the grant we will expand our program to include, Robotics, Green Stem, Engineering, Computer Science. Technology ¨ PS 52 was one of only twelve schools in the NYCDOE that was selected to participate in a Computer Science Pilot Program call CS4 ALL (Computer Science For All) during the 2016-2017 school year. Six of our staff members served as Core Members of the Computer Science Team. Staff members attended professional learning sessions in August, 2016, and two lead computer science teachers will continue to participate in professional learning sessions throughout this school year. As part of the pilot program, staff members received robots, laptops, IPADS, computer coding games, books and resources to support the curriculum that was distributed to them for CS4 ALL. ¨ Smart Boards, laptops and document cameras are utilized as tools to assist teachers in providing 21 st Century technology based lessons to support various learning styles. ¨ Our partnership with Teaching Matters is unique. Teaching Matters formed a partnership with an organization called Mastery Connect. The partnership enables schools to participate in teacher and leadership professional learning sessions that focus on best practices for using formative and sumative data and house that data on a site called Mastery Connect. Professional Development ¨ Differentiated professional development sessions are provided to staff members throughout the school year. Lead teachers, administrators, staff developers, our magnet site coordinator, magnet resource coordinator and consultants provide these services. ¨ Collectively, our teachers make decisions about improving instructional practices for new and experienced teachers. ¨ Time is allocated specifically for teachers to look closely at student work. Specific protocols are followed and “next steps” are identified after each session. Cultural ¨ LEAP - ALLL - Active Learning Leads to Literacy program - Multisensory, hands-on arts based program ¨ Thinking Games facilitated by select staff members. Engineering and Computer Science Enrichment programs facilitated by staff members and consultants. Health and Nutrition ¨ Wellness Committee conducts surveys, writes proposals for physical education and he ¨ Movement Programs - Activity Works, Go Noodle ¨ Teachers participating in the Cook Shop Program teach parents and students to prepare healthy meals containing various fruits, vegetables proteins, and make healthy meal choices. 1  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately one third of our student population resides in temporary housing. As a result, we have a high mobility rate and a poor attendance and punctuality rate. Additionally, about one fifth of our students are students with disabilities. We have many students who received related services such as Occupational Therapy, Speech and Language Services and SETSS Services. We have ICT classes on every grade level from kindergarten through grade five. Additionally, we have three self contained 12-1-1 classes and one 12-1 class. Many of our students would benefit from social and emotional support services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our staff members are very passionate about education. We made the most progress with Collaborative Teaching. Our teachers were very successful with meeting weekly in teacher teams as well as weekly vertical meetings in which teachers would examine curriculum, participate in looking at student work protocols and norm assessments. We will continue to work on Collaborative Teaching and focus on Strong Family and Community Ties. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q052 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 462 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 42 40 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 20 18 22 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 71.6% % Reduced Lunch 7.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.7% 13.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 57% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 53 50 22 89.9% 0.2% 19.7% 78.1% 3.2% 3.5% 2 0% 9.2 23.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. K – 2 ELA Student performance trends can be easily identified from the results of the Fountas & Pinnell assessments. Fountas & Pinnell results assist in identifying areas of strengths and weaknesses which allows us to improve instruction. Ninety eight percent of our kindergarten students enter as non-readers, more than fifty percent of students entering grade one are below grade level. 3 – 5 ELA Student performance trends can be easily identified from the results of the 2018 New York State English Language Arts Assessment. These results will allow us to monitor student proficiency, track student progress, target instruction and predict performance. The item skills analysis of New York State ELA results will assist in identifying areas of strengths and weaknesses which will allow us to improve instruction. Teachers will identify student needs by using the data from the New York State English Language Arts results and then differentiate instruction by content strand. Our third grade students have consistently scored lower than our fourth and fifth grade students but during the 2015-2016 school year, the third grade students' scores soared in ELA and the fourth and fifth grade students' scores remained about the same as the previous year. The supports implemented for third grade students were realized in the scores obtained during the spring of 2016. We expect the trend to continue with increasing scores on all grade levels. Student Performance Trends New York State English Language Arts Assessment Grade School Year 2013-2014 School Year 2014-2015 School Year 2015-2016 School Year 2016-2017 3 4 5 22.4% 23.6% 30.9% 12.3% 21.8% 29.2% 36.9% 22.3% 30.6% 35.0% 17.0% 26.0% 4  K – 2 Math Student performance trends can be easily identified from the results of the Pearson Unit Exams and Mathletics. These results have allowed us to monitor student proficiency, track student progress, target instruction and to predict performance. Pearson Unit Exams results assist in identifying areas of strengths and weaknesses which allows us to improve instruction in early childhood. Teachers identify student needs by using the data from Pearson and Mathletics then differentiate instruction by content strand. Our early childhood students have consistently showed weakness in number sense and operations. We will monitor student progress with the assistance of an on-line research based mathematics program called Mathletics. Students all over the world utilize the program and engage in world-wide competitions. 3 – 5 Math Student performance trends can be easily identified from the results of the New York State Math Assessment. These results will allow us to monitor student proficiency, track student progress, target instruction and to predict performance. New York State Math results assist in identifying areas of strengths and weaknesses which allows us to improve instruction. Teachers will identify student needs by using the data from the math results and then differentiate instruction by content strand. We will be monitoring student progress more specifically in early childhood grades and we will provide additional math professional development to support teachers . The performance trends show that our students in grade four scored lower on mathematics state assessments than the third or fifth grade students. During the 2016-2017 school year, we will identify the students who have scored in the high two/low three category. They will be progress monitored more carefully and teachers will ensure they receive the small group instruction that is necessary to push them from a level 2 student to a level 3 student. Additionally, we will identify, monitor, and coach students who may have the potential to move from a level 3 to a level. Student Performance Trends New York State Mathematics Assessment Grade School Year 2013-2014 School Year 2014-2015 School Year 2015-2016 School Year 2016-2017 3 4 5 21.8% 17.1% 16.4% 26% 25.9% 14.4% 34.6 12.7 29.0 24.0% 14.0% 25.0% Our students have struggled in reading and math problem solving. Therefore, our priority need is to develop literacy goals for children from when they enter the building and address students’ reading deficits through careful monitoring of their progress through our major subjects and STEAM initiatives. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019, 50% of students in grades K-5 will demonstrate an increase toward achieving mastery in Common Core ELA standards demonstrated by increasing at least two Fountas & Pinnell (F & P) reading levels from the September 2018 baseline to June, 2019 end of year assessment. All classroom teachers will be responsible for implementing strategies to achieve this increase. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monitor student proficiency, track student progress, and target instruction using the data from Fountas and Pinnell. Benchmarks assessments will be given four times a year and teachers will participate in norming sessions to ensure consistency. Differentiate instruction through flexible small groups and remedial strategies. Monitor student proficiency, track student progress, and target instruction using the data from iReady ELA. Benchmarks assessments will be given three times a year. The program provides individualized instruction to students and also groups students according to their results from the diagnostic assessments. Teachers can plan strategic lessons based on diagnostic assessments. Classroom teachers of grades K-5 Classroom teachers of grades K-5 Principal and Assistant Principal Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Sept. Grade Leaders 2018 Assistant Principal through June 2019 Professional development will be provided to improve instruction for the early childhood grades through the Early Reading Matters initiative. Early Reading Matters teaches teachers how to implement research based strategies to improve student reading levels and comprehension. Professional development will be provided for teachers on a bi-weekly basis. Coaches will assist teachers with strategies in their classrooms. K-3 Sept. 2018 Principal, Assistant Principal and Lead Teachers through June 2019 Consultant Grade level teacher teams will examine and analyze formative and summative assessment data to develop implications for practice within daily balanced literacy instruction for all students. Unit Pre and post assessments will be given and analyzed through the use of Mastery Connect thereby informing teachers of the standards that need to be taught again to achieve mastery. Continue to Implement Common Core Learning Standards, Danielson Framework, Units of Study, and performance tasks during the 2018-2019. Teachers will participate in cycles of inter visitation called Teacher Rounds, in which teachers analyze data Grade level teacher teams Sept. Lead Teachers 2018 Consultants through June 2019 All teachers Sept. Principal and Assistant Principal 2018 7 to address the problem of practice and create next steps for instruction. The NYC Performance Series Assessment results will be used to address student needs. Teachers will meet quarterly to discuss student progress. 3-5 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2017-2018 school year we began to conduct workshops for parents and families to introduce them to the theory of the Mathematics Growth Mindset. The guidance counselor worked collaboratively with two other teachers to conduct the sessions. We will continue to engage parents and implement additional sessions during the 2018-2019 school year to review curriculum and standards of focus for the school year, across the curriculum. During the 2018-2019, we will review ELA routines, benchmark assessments used in ELA, offer workshops for the ELA tests and standards, as well as offer workshops regarding strategies parents can use to support comprehension. The Parent Coordinator and PTA president will provide outreach to the parents through the use of fliers. The parent coordinator will survey parents to gain an understanding of the needs of the community and host workshops on issues affecting the community as well provide ELA support through the participation in district initiatives such as Spring Press and other academic fairs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Use the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark kit throughout the year to ensure that students are placed in appropriately leveled books for independent reading. Both classroom teacher and cluster teachers will work together to ensure assessments are completed and entered into our Google sites data system according to schedule. Teachers will continue to provide one to one and small group instruction through weekly reading conferences. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, 70% of students in grades k-5 will increase one level on the Fountas and Pinnell assessment. 8  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? A comprehensive assessment of our school’s academic program was measured by two reports the NYC Department of Education utilizes to measure Supportive Environment, the Quality Review Report and the School Survey Report. Results from the 2014-2015 School Quality Review, our latest Quality Review Report, for indicators 1.4 (Maintaining a culture of mutual trust) and 3.4 (Establishing a culture for learning which includes high expectations for students, staff and families) indicate a rating of proficient. However, the School Survey Report for the 2016-2017 indicates our school results are six percentage points lower than the city wide average. A careful analysis of the report indicates that staff members are concerned about student attendance, completion of homework and student emotional health. Trends related to ELA and Mathematics can be found below: K – 2 ELA Student performance trends can be easily identified from the results of of the Fountas and Pinnell assessments. Fountas & Pinnell results assist us with identifying areas of strengths and weaknesses which allows us to improve instruction. Ninety eight percent of our kindergarten students enter as non-readers, more than fifty percent of students entering grade one are below grade level. 3 – 5 ELA Student performance trends can be identified from the results of the 2018 New York State English Language Arts Assessment. These results will allow us to monitor student proficiency, track student progress, target instruction and predict performance. Proficiency scores for third grade students have been consistent over the last three years. Fifth grade has struggled to maintain consistent proficiency scores but have shown modest improvement over since 2017. Fourth grade reflects the greatest achievement growth over the past year. The supports implemented for third grade students during school year 2016-2017 were also realized in the 4th grade scores obtained during the spring of 2017. We expect the trend to continue throughout the upper grades with increasing scores on all grade levels as instructional strategies are shared through collaboration. We have added additional professional learning supports for for Student Performance Trends New York State English Language Arts Assessment Grade School Year 2014-2015 School Year 2015-2016 School Year 2016-2017 School Year 2017-2018 3 36.9% 22.4% 35% 36% 0 23.6% 30.9% 22.3% 30.6% 17% 26% 42.8% 28.2% 4 5 K – 2 Math Student performance trends can be easily identified from the results of the Pearson Unit Exams and JiJi. These results have allowed us to monitor student proficiency, track student progress, target instruction and to predict performance. Pearson Unit Exams results assist in identifying areas of strengths and weaknesses which allows us to improve instruction in early childhood. 3 – 5 Math Student performance trends can be easily identified from the results of the New York State Math Assessment. These results will allow us to monitor student proficiency, track student progress, target instruction and to predict performance. New York State Math results assist in identifying areas of strengths and weaknesses which allows us to improve instruction. Teachers will identify student needs by using the data from the math results and then differentiate instruction by content strand. The performance trends show that our students in grades three and four increased scores on mathematics state assessments. During the 2017-2018 our school began to focus intently on visual mathematics and hands on learning. Classrooms were equipped with a variety of manipulatives and teachers as well as classroom paraprofessionals were provided with on-going professional development in math by consultants and lead teachers. A major focus for professional development was conceptual understanding and how to impart that to students. Student Performance Trends New York State Mathematics Assessment Grade School Year 2014-2015 School Year 2015-2016 School Year 2016-2017 School Year 2017-2018 3 4 5 34.6% 12.7% 29% 21.8% 17.1% 16.4% 24% 14% 25% 29% 22.5% 20.6% Our students have struggled in math problem solving as a result of reading deficiencies. Therefore, our priority need is to develop literacy goals for children from when they enter the building and address students’ reading deficits through careful monitoring of their progress through our major subjects , daily tasks such as S.O.L.V.E. problem of the day and STEAM initiatives. In addition, students in grades K-5 will be participating in online Math and ELA support through i-Ready. Students are given a thorough diagnostic assessment and personalized lessons. Teachers will have access to scores, grouping suggestions and areas for focus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 1  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, the attendance rates of one hundred students with the poorest attendance will improve by 25%. 2 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monitor student attendance and punctuality daily and chart results. Recognize students who have made improvements in attendance or punctuality bi-monthly Provide an interest inventory to students and their with the lowest attendance and punctuality rate to determine some of the factors that may be contributing to poor attendance. Students with lowest attendance rates Students with lowest attendance rates Sept. Assistant Principal 2018 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal Parenting workshops and meetings implemented to assist parents with parenting and counseling services Parents Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselor Implement structures that include celebrations and initiatives for the students who have made the greatest improvements. Students with lowest attendance rates Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will conduct interactive sessions that will educate parents about health, wellness and attendance. The guidance counselor will work collaboratively with the parent coordinator and several teachers to conduct workshops and provide incentives. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  Attendance team members, data reports, incentives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, the attendance rates of one hundred students with the poorest attendance will improve by 15%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Spreadsheets created from the data received will be utilized for comparison in order to develop next steps Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Quality Review from the 2014-2015 School Year, the school’s area of strength is teacher involvement in professional collaboration on teams using an inquiry approach. The reviewer states “distributive leadership structures are in place that supports teacher teams in meeting flexibility to consistently analyze assessment data and student work for students they share.” According to the Quality Review Report from the 2017-2018 School Year, though rated "Developing," in Quality Indicator: 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development, it is noted that teacher teams continue to meet to discuss standards for M.O.S.L. and provide support to each other through participation in looking at student work protocol sessions, it was not explicitly clear how the work of the teams has impacted student achievement. The reviewer states "Teachers stated that the strategies used in the lower grades are mirrored in upper grades, thus implying coherence. Teachers mentioned that receiving feedback from the other teachers helped to support their practice. There continue to be leadership structures in place that support teacher teams in meeting flexibility to consistently analyze assessment data and student work. Every grade in each content area has a teacher leader selected by administrators from among the highest rated staff across grades and content. Teacher leaders meet regularly with administration to discuss curriculum, student performance trends and the needs of the grade or department. School leaders use Google systems to review teacher team meeting agendas and notes and to provide and receive feedback or units, lesson plans, student work products and teacher reflections. Administration promotes the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards; including the instructional shifts, by assuming planning and instruction directly connects with the curriculum. Students in grades 3,4 and 5 are not showing adequate growth on the New York State ELA exams. A priority need is for teacher teams to focus on analyzing student work and developing strategies to address students’ deficits in comprehension and phonics through the use of data from iReady, grade level assessments, Fountas and Pinnell Running Records and Performance Series. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019, all teachers will have participated in Teacher Rounds sessions. Groups represent both general and special education teachers across grade levels. Group leaders will facilitate sessions, lead their teams and celebrate collaborative efforts during culminating sessions. As a result, Teacher Rounds groups across grade and instructional levels will have established methods to address student educational needs that have proved effective in the classroom as evidenced by lesson observation of strategies established by rounds debriefing and next steps planning. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will establish and follow protocols to look at student work, identify deficiencies and determine specific instructional strategies to address students’ weaknesses. Teachers across grade levels and instructional groupings will take turns presenting in protocols. In this way, work products of special populations including English Language Learners will also be examined during protocol sessions. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers on teacher teams Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Grade leaders, school administrators Teachers on grade teams will craft teaching points to address student gaps. Teaching points will be strategically developed based on current MOSL assessment data and group planning. Grade teacher teams The Fountas and Pinnell reading benchmark assessment will be administered at least three times per year in grades 3-5. Teachers will participate in norming sessions to ensure consistency in assessment practice and scoring guidelines. Literacy teachers in grades 3-5 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Grade leaders, school administrators Teachers, grade leaders, school administrators Professional development will be provided to literacy teachers. Both general education as well as ENL teachers will participate in Learning Partners Program workshops to plan collaboratively to support school-wide curriculum and instruction. Literacy and ENL teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Grade leaders, principal, assistant principal and NYCDOE trainers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher leaders, administrators and guidance counselor will conduct ongoing workshops to ensure parents understand how staff members plan. Teachers will be able to emphasize this during the evening sessions conducted throughout the school year. Administrators will supervise those events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will meet in teams on Monday and Tuesday afternoons and during the school day to discuss strategies to help improve student achievement in ELA in comprehension and phonics. We will also use i-Ready, an online program that offers differentiated instruction to students in ELA. Teachers will also receive professional development in Early Reading Matters through Teaching Matters consultancy to discuss and implement research based strategies to 7  improve student reading levels and comprehension. Coaches will assist teachers with strategies in their classrooms. As an additional resource, teachers will continue to participate in intervistiation at schools identified as having exemplary teacher teams. Budgeting and resources were allocated through the Magnet School Grant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, 75% of classroom teachers will be introduced to Teacher Round protocol sessions as a method for collaboration and instructional planning. Measurement of collaborative efforts through rounds will be noted in concluding debriefing documents that will show improvements in student shared reading notebook rubric scores. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Resource Book: The Power of Teacher Rounds. This book will serve as a guide for teachers to organize their rounds process. On-going M.O.S.L. formative assessment results will serve as the primary instrument of measure. In addition, participating teachers will be able to closely monitor immediate impact of instructional shifts generated by the Rounds in weekly rubric scores of student notebook entries such as Problem of the Day and Shared Reading. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Quality Review for the 2015-2016 school year, “School leaders consistently communicate high expectations including professionalism, instruction, communication and other elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching to the entire staff and teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that consistently communicates high expectations for all students. School leaders meet with each teacher individually at least two times per year to communicate expectations for professionalism and to discuss observation feedback and to create professional growth plan that is reviewed and revised throughout the year.” Professional development has focused on the key components of the Chancellor’s initiatives, CCLS, and Danielson Framework. This year we will increase opportunities for teachers to share best practices with each other, to expand their leadership skills and provide increased opportunities for teachers to facilitate workshops during weekly professional development activities. The school was chosen to participate in the Framework for Teaching Clusters Pilot where a team of teachers and the principal will build knowledge of the Framework for Teaching and receive training on the use of the full twenty two components. The priority need is to ensure the professional growth of teachers to develop and deliver support that drives student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 10% of teachers will increase at least one level in Danielson Framework 3C - Engaging Students in Learning- as compared to their 2018 school year end rating as evidenced by Advance ratings. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018 Professional Learning Committee through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In consultation with the school professional learning committee teachers will receive professional development on Danielson components during Monday professional development activities. Observations will be conducted for each teacher at least four times per year. There will be ongoing discussions between administration and teachers; feedback will be given following observations including next steps. Teachers Schedule inter-visitation to allow teachers to observe best practices of their colleagues. Teachers Sept. 2018 through Highly rated teachers June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the school year, from September, 2018 through June, 2019, the School Leadership Team will discuss the Framework. The components will be discussed and explained thoroughly. Each member of the team will be responsible for sharing that information with the constituents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, per session for professional development, and inter-visitation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, 5% of teachers will increase at least one level in Domains I and/or IV. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Reports generated in ADVANCE noting MOTP information Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In recognition of the critical roles of parents as partners a priority need is for parents to be involved in their children’s educational experience. The attendance at workshops in the past has been low since we have a very transient population and high number of students residing in temporary housing. During the 2017-2018 school year, only 44% of parents completed the school survey. However, we are committed to building partnerships with parents through monthly parent workshops focused on supporting students’ social, emotional and instructional needs. Additionally as a community, we have the expertise of a school community director that can provide resources and outreach to our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 10% increase of parents at school functions, parent association meetings and family events as compared to June 2018 as evidenced by PTA attendance records. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create a parent survey to gather information about the types of workshops parents would be interested in attending. Parents Sept. 2018 SLT Teachers will use parent outreach time on Tuesday afternoons to provide workshops around CCLS, NYS assessments, homework help, etc. Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers Regular communication with parents through Class Dojo, school wide and classroom newsletters. Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 School activities included family events and workshops that address students’ needs including SWDs and ELLS. Workshops for the ELLS include information regarding the NYSITELL and NYSELAT testing instruments used to assess student language in English as well as strategies to be used to help students develop language, to be given by the ENL teachers. SWDS workshops include information regarding testing accommodations, time allocation and how to best work with students with disabilities. Parents of SWDs and ELLS Sept. 2018-June 2019 Grade leaders, school administrators Teachers, principal, assistant principal and parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School wide events calendar, Tuesday afternoon engagement, parent coordinator, Internet web site Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parent attendance at school-wide functions compared to February, 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance reports collected during meetings and events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One fifty minute period three – five times per week based on student need. Teachers will meet with students individually and in small groups One fifty minute period three – five times per week based on student need. Teachers will meet with students individually and in small groups One fifty minute period three – five times per week based on student need. Teachers will meet with students individually and in small groups Frequency based on need When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Services provided during the school day and after school Services provided during the school day and after school Services provided during the school day Services provided during the school day Frequency based on need Services provided during the school day Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark, NYS ELA results, NYC Performance Series and Teacher Recommendation Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Fountas and Pinnell Intervention, Great Leaps, Achieve 3000, Differentiated Instruction in ELA classes, RTI Envision Baseline Data, NYS Mathematics results, NYC Performance Series and Teacher Recommendation Differentiated Instruction in Mathematics classes, JIJI (Mind Research Institute, Frequent Assessment, Small Group Instruction Teacher Recommendation, Fourth Grade NYC Science MOSL and Fourth Grade NYS Science results Teacher Recommendation Hands on Experimentation infused within classroom instruction, science lab equipped to provide Tiers II and III intervention Social Studies period tailored to meet individual students’ needs with intervention as needed Group and individual counseling during the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Teacher Referrals 5 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are currently 122 student residing in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Basic school supplies - All students will receive bookbags and school uniforms. Additionally, all students will attend the school BBQ/field-day/game event without cost. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Mentoring services will be offered to new teachers as well as senior staff members. Our lead teachers conduct professional development workshops and push into classrooms as needed. Coaching will be offered to all teachers periodically throughout the school year. Consultant services are contracted throughout the school year from various vendors to assist with technology initiatives and instructional improvement. Additionally, support is provided by borough field support center, the principal, data specialist, lead teachers, teacher effectiveness team and instructional team. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). During school year 2016-2017, all teachers in grades 3-5 were able to participate in a three day S.R.S.D. writing workshop. In this way, teacher teams were more equipped to effectively collaborate and work towards school-wide writing goals. Teachers in grades K-3 receive on-going professional development in Early Reading Matters reading program. Teachers on all grade levels participate in Mastery Connect sessions during which they learn to create, upload and score targeted assessments as well as one on one conferencing geared towards specific goals. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 9  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We will assist preschool children to transition to early childhood programs by ensuring the curriculum and collaboration is transparent. Vertical and horizontal staff meetings pertaining to curriculum and instruction will continue. Staff members and parents will continue to participate in parent involvement activities and professional development workshops. Social Emotional activities are an essential part of the school day. Activities include: Following one step and two step directions, speaking in sentences, expressing and describing feelings, and listening with an understanding of directions. Pre K students are also exposed to coding activities that mirror more rigorous computer science tasks in upper grades. In addition, parents are able to participate in engineering programs such as Bricks for Kids alongside their children and at periodic school sponsored events. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The administration regularly meets with a committee of teachers known as the Instructional Team (MOSL) to discuss assessment options. The school provides professional development to teachers and utilizes Mastery Connect Consultancy regarding how to use results and data to improve instruction. Teachers meet during teacher team meetings to discuss student work, plan for lessons, formative assessment and use the results to address students’ needs in the classroom. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 0  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 224,984 29,494 0 0 3,054,865 x x X 12, 16, 19, 20 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 1  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy P.S. 52 Q School Parent Compact Our school, P.S. 52Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. I. School Responsibilities Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: · using academic learning time efficiently; · respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; · implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; · offering high quality instruction in all content areas; · providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act; 3  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: · Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; · Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; · Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; · Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; · Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; · involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; · Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; · Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: · Ensuring that staff members have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; · Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; · Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; · Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Parent Workshops and Parent Meetings Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students All students and parents will be supported by the academic, enrichment and family support programs offered. 4  Staff members will continuously plan workshops and professional learning experiences throughout the school year. Parental Involvement and School Quality Staff members will plan engaging activities for families in an effort to increase parental involvement. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-Parent Compact (SPC) Our school, P.S. 52Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 5  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff members have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Parent Workshops and Parent Meetings Staff members will provide continued communication and support to parents throughout the school year. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Parents/guardians are expected to communicate effectively with staff members to assist students with making continued progress II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities Students are expected to set goals and follow actions plans to accomplish those goals 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 52 has had a steady increase in the number of ELL students over the last year. During the 2017-18 school year we had close to 60 children identified as ELL's, with most students being at the Transitioning level or above. Due to the transient nature of our student population, we currently have 44 ELLs, with 18 students at the Entering or Emerging level. Many of these students are newcomers to the United States and are entering school with limited literacy skills in their native language. These students are finding it hard to keep up in the mainstream classroom and require extra assistance beyond their mandated ENL service. In order to address this growing problem, our Title III program will provide supplemental services for these children in order to address their academic needs. The program will also target our ELLs who have been receiving services for 3 or more years and are reading below grade level. Data analysis from NYSESLAT, NYS ELA , BOY assessments in ELA, running records, teacher observations and teacher generated assessment tools will be used to identify strengths and weaknesses and drive instruction. The objective of the program is to help our students become proficient in English and also to improve their reading and writing skills. The students will be provided with intense instruction in listening, speaking, reading and writing. This will take into account their learning styles and identified intelligences. Instruction will be differentiated to suit their needs based on ongoing formative assessments. They will be exposed to scaffolding strategies that will enhance acquisition of social and academic language. . Content will be made comprehensible in order to improve vocabulary and understanding. Students will use a variety of graphic organizers to help them process and evaluate information and develop better writing skills so they can meet the higher academic standards and work towards proficiency on the NYSESLAT as well as the state exams in ELA. Direct instruction in English Language Arts will take place during our after-school program. The Magnet Scholars After-School Program for ELLs will begin in January and continue through May. The program will be scheduled for Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:50 pm-4:50 pm. Notifications for program eligibility will be sent home in English and the parent's preferred language when necessary. We will utilize the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit to translate these letters and copies of all notices sent home will be maintained by the ENL teacher. The program will provide services to approximately 25 ELLs , depending on enrollment. The instruction will be provided in English and will be taught by 1 common branch teacher and 1 ENL teacher. The goal for this program will be to help our students achieve language proficiency by providing them with every opportunity to learn and practice their academic language skills. It will also focus on increasing reading and writing skills across all levels of proficiency so that our students can actively participate in their monolingual classes. This program will utilize the Imagine Learning program, leveled books, computers, and interactive SMARTboard lessons, The students will also use notebooks and folders to document their work.The language of instruction will be English, however the students native language will be used in order to promote and encourage comprehension when necessary. 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Students will have access to bilingual glossaries, dictionaries and books, as well as I-pads in order to translate or look up words. Groups will be formed based on grade and proficiency level, but they will be flexible according to individual needs and based on ongoing assessments. This program will assist and support our ELLs so that they can meet the performance standards in the content areas and become college and career ready. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The over-arching goal is to guarantee that all staff members have the tools to support our English language learners in meeting the Common Core Standards. All staff members must continually improve their ability to manage a student-centered classroom and integrate first and second language into the content areas. The ENL teacher team will work collaboratively to develop and revise unit of study maps and lesson plans and discuss student learning. Staff members will work with school administrators to share best practices through teacher portfolio presentations. -Teachers to receive training: 4 teachers, 1 Educational Assistant, 1 Guidance Counselor -Schedule and duration: Terrific Tuesdays (the first Tuesday of each month-Beginning October 2018) Time and Sessions: 3:20 pm-3:55 pm October 30, November 27, December 18, January 29, February 26, March 26, April 30, May 28 for a total of 8 sessions. -Topics to be covered: Building Language Proficiency, Looking at Student Work Protocol, Making the Transition to English, Early Literacy Development for Students who Speak a Language other than English, Mastering the Language of Math. -Name of Provider: Jill Cagan and Jenae Canty Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Immigrant parents are new to our country. Our goal is to support and empower our immigrant parents so that they can support and empower their children. We will provide monthly parent engagement activities for our immigrant and ENL parents. -Schedule and duration: The last Tuesday of each month (9:00 am-10:00 am and 2:45 p.m.-3:20 p.m.) -Topics to be covered: English Language Workshops, CCLS Workshops, How to Navigate the DOE Workshops, The Middle School Application Process for grade 5 parents. -How parents will be notified of these activities: Special invitation (notices), phone calls by our Parent Coordinator. All notices will be translated into the parent's preferred language and we will utilize the resources of the Translation and Interpretation Unit as needed. -Workshop Facilitator(s): Rae Haskins, Guidance Counselor and Donna Santana, Parent Coordinator and Jenae Canty, ENL/ELL Teacher. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name Borough Queens School Number 052 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Linda Pough Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jill Cagan Teacher/Subject Area Joanne Helenese-Barnett Teacher/Subject Area Lynn Morris Related-Service Provider Jenae Canty- SETTS Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Deborah Roney Coach NA School Counselor Rae Haskins Parent Anasthacia Mentis Parent Coordinator Donna Santana Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 474 Total number of ELLs 42 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.86% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLS, we are currently using Fountas and Pinnell.. As a student reads from a benchmark book, the teacher is able to make notations on self-correction, meaning and structure. This information allows teachers to place the student at the developmentally appropriate instructional level and identify a student’s independent reading level. The data from the running records shows that our ELLs in grades K and one are currently reading well below grade level. Students in grade two and up are also presently reading below grade level . Most of these students are actually reading about 2 or more levels below where they should be. This means that the ENL teacher will be working closely with the classroom teacher to address the deficiencies in reading skills. Most of our students are very good at decoding text but struggle with comprehension. Guided reading and shared reading will be used in the ENL class in order to build vocabulary and increase 2  comprehension. Teacher created assessments will also be used to assess mastery of math and writing skills and the information gathered is used to provide additional assistance and inform instruction in these areas. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Based on the information gathered from both the Fountas and Pinnell assessments and teacher created assessments, the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher gather information about each student's strengths and weaknesses. The ENL teacher and each classroom teacher work together to plan for effective instruction using push-in and pull-out instructional models. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher communicate each week in order to plan lessons that target specific skills based on formative assessments. Guided reading and shared reading are used in the ENL class in order to build vocabulary and increase comprehension. During push-in instruction, the ENL teacher works with students in their classrooms to provide targeted instruction based on identified areas of need. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 52Q uses the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and the NYC Performance Tasks to identify baselines, progress and areas of need. For newly admitted students, the NYSITELL is used as a baseline to determine each child's level of English language proficiency. The NYC Math Performance Tasks and the NYC Writing Prompt are also used to measure progress and areas of need. Teachers use the data to assess each child's individual growth as well as any areas of weakness. Results from the Periodic Assessments, Fountas and Pinnell and NYSESLAT, are further used to determine if our students are meeting AYP for ELL's. This feedback helps to guide the instruction of the ENL program and assess the needs of students in the four modalities. Based on our evaluation, different teaching methodologies are used to create effective teaching practices and learning. Evaluation is on-going process and helps to determine students progress and the effectiveness of the programs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, the information is shared with both the ENL teacher and classroom teacher so that students progress and identified areas of need can be addressed. Our teachers work collaboratively together to plan instruction that is effective and meets the individual needs of each child. All interventions are dependent on identified student need and may include targeted instruction on a specific skill, participation in AIS services or inclusion in our after school or Saturday academy. Data will be analyzed throughout the year to ensure that all instructional decisions are rigorous and impactful in order to meet students' specific needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Ours school uses multiple sources of data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RtI framework by providing instruction based on the changing needs of our students. Students are identified based on their results on the ELA, NYSESLAT and various formative and summative assessments and are given core literacy instruction that builds on and expands their existing oral language in order to support literacy learning and context knowledge. Students who are identified as being in Tier 1 are exposed to a rigorous , creative curriculum which includes language development for ELLs. Those students who are identified as Tier 2 participate in Academic Intervention groups where instruction and assessments are differentiated to meet their needs , in addition to teaching the core instruction. Intensive and individualized instruction that focuses on a small, targeted set of skills is given to those students identified as Tier 3 in a small group setting or one to one instruction for students who participate in the SETTS program. Data from periodic assessments and ongoing formal and informal assessments will be analyzed throughout the year so that all instructional decisions are made using the most current data . 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. PS 52 uses the results from the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELA and Math exams to evaluate and inform our instruction for ELLS. Data from the 2017 NYSESLAT showed that our students still need extra assistance in both writing and reading. We had 3 students test at the Entering level, 4 at the Emerging level, 7 at the transitioning level, 11 at the Expanding level and 3 at the Commanding level. The students who scored at the Entering and Emerging level were all recent admits within the last two years who had limited literacy skills in their native language.Results from the 2017 Math and ELA exams showed that our ELLS 3  are scoring very low, with most students at Level 1 or 2 in both areas. The ENL teacher will need to address these areas of weakness during both push-in and pull-out instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Once the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores are uploaded in ATS, the information is shared with the ENL and classroom teacher, so that students can be properly grouped for instruction and we can provide targeted instruction in speaking, reading, writing and/or listening if needed. Classroom teachers are given a list of ELLs in their classroom along with their level of proficiency and areas of need based on the exam results. Results from the Math and ELA assessments are also shared with all teachers so that everyone is aware of each students progress in these areas. Students can then receive extra assistance in any identified areas of need. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL students are grouped heterogeneously by grade level for their standalone ENL instruction, with no more than two grades together. Instruction during this time is focused on developing language skills so that students can be successful in the core content areas The ENL teacher will work with a small group of students in the ENL classroom in order to focus on the language needs of each child. Integrated instruction is done on each grade level. During this time, the ENL teacher will work alongside the classroom teacher to build English language skills through content area instruction in ELA or Math. The ENL teacher and the classroom teacher will co-plan in order to teach both the language and content standards. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels will receive 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Students who are at the Transitioning level will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of either standalone ENL or more integrated ENL. Students at the Expanding level will receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL and students who are commanding will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students receive their mandated instructional time each week from the ENL teacher. Our Entering and Emerging level students receive 360 total minutes of ENL instruction which includes 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA, our Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 total minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction and our Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. All instruction is in compliance with the CR Part 154 requirements for English as a New Language. Students will receive the required minutes of both standalone ENL and integrated ENL based on their proficiency level. The proficiency level of each ELL is communicated with the classroom teacher so that differentiated instruction can be provided based on individual needs. We do not offer a separate Home Language Arts program, but home language support is provided through the use of bilingual glossaries and dictionaries, bilingual flashcards, trade books in the native language, peer tutoring and placement in a class with a teacher or student who speaks the child's 4  native language(if possible). Several of our bilingual staff members provide additional support and individual assistance to students who are newcomers. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL program provides both literacy and content are instruction. Data from interim assessments, running records, performance tasks, baseline assessments, individual students conferences and monthly assessments in math and ELA are used to drive instruction. Literacy instruction is provided each day through the use of read alouds, shared reading, guided reading, shared writing and individual writing. Grade level content instruction in Social Studies, Science and Math is also provided during integrated ENL instruction. The ENL teacher uses math manipulatives, posters, maps, pictures, graphic organizers, trade books, big books, realia, picture dictionaries and multi media support in order to make the content more comprehensible. Native language support through the use of picture dictionaries and peer tutoring is used when necessary.Academic rigor and consistency are the keys to our student's success. The ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teachers in order to align the ENL instruction with content area instruction in each grade. Scaffolding strategies such as pre-teaching vocabulary, using prior knowledge, modeling, and contextualization are woven throughout each lesson. Instruction is designed to address the needs of learners at each proficiency level so that language and cognitive skills are developed through content topics and themes. All content area instruction is aligned with the Common Core Standards in ELA and Math and the New York State Standards in Science and Social Studies. The ENL teacher and content area teachers use formal and informal assessments to determine movement toward content standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? PS 52 ensures that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language by providing translated versions of standardized tests in both math and science where applicable. Students also have access to glossaries in their first language and bilingual dictionaries and multi- cultural books to enhance their language acquisition. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status . Currently there are no SIFE students at P.S. 52. However, if such students are registered their needs will be addressed by using differentiated instruction and ensuring that they are given their mandated hours of instruction based on their proficiency levels. Teaching skills and strategies will be modified to accommodate their academic profiles and learning styles. Students who have been in the US for less than three years will receive instruction that focuses on all aspects of language acquisition. Students will be actively listening, speaking, reading and writing on a daily basis. Content area instruction will be integrated with linguistic instruction in order to maximize learning opportunities. The goal for these students is to move towards language proficiency. These students will also receive intervention programs such as AIS, extended day, peer tutoring and small group instruction. Since ELLS must take the ELA exam after only one year, those students will also attend our after school ELA tutoring sessions. They will also receive additional ELA prep in the ENL classroom. Students who have been receiving ENL instruction for 4-6 years are receiving instruction that focuses on reading, writing and critical thinking skills. The ENL teacher will focus on addressing weaknesses in reading comprehension, fluency, writing mechanics and writing content. The goal for these students is to continue to improve their reading and writing skills. We have no long term ELLs. Our former ELLs will continue to receive extra time on all assessments and will continue to receive AIS services. They will also receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction in the content area. They will also be invited to attend our after school ELA and Math test prep sessions. The ENL teacher will continue to monitor their progress and will confer with the classroom teacher to identify any areas of concern. 5  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL-SWDs have access to word walls, picture dictionaries, flash cards, a photo library, the internet and other age and grade appropriate tools that are available to provide extra support when needed. The ENL teacher has a copy of their IEPs so that their assignments can be modified when necessary to best meet their academic needs and to ensure that they are receiving all mandated services.The ENL teacher uses multiple scaffolding strategies with these students in order to reinforce what they have learned, such as pre-teaching content vocabulary, using prior knowledge, providing sentence starters, using graphic organizers and modeling. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school provides every opportunity to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. We currently have two students who are in a self-contained class and two who are in an ICT class. These students are integrated with other English language learners during the ENL period. They interact with the general education population at lunch, during assembly programs and in school -wide activities. In addition they participate in the health and physical education classes with the rest of the school's population. Students are given differentiated instruction that will meet their needs and help them achieve their IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. PS 52 uses the Mathletics online program to provide extra support for our students. Mathletics combines targeted and adaptive curriculum content, structured and interactive support, with engaging gaming and rewards- all aligned to common core and state based standards. Our students in grades 3-5 use Achieve 3000 to help improve their reading skills. This program allows each child to receive daily differentiated instruction for non-fiction reading and writing that's tailored to their own Lexile reading level. The program adjust to each child's reading level and adapts the material so that each child is reading at his or her individual level. Our students across all grades receive science instruction several times a week and participate in the STEM program. All ELL students also benefit from our daily AIS period which provides additional support in math and ELA. All of our ELL students are also invited to participate in our after school test prep sessions for Math and ELA that begin in January. Students for this program are identified based on formal and informal assessments in Math and reading that are given throughout the year. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2017-18 school year we are using the Imagine Learning program for our ELLs since the data from testing shows that they are weak in reading skills. Imagine Learning provides explicit, targeted instruction within an individualized learning path that adjusts to each students needs. It teaches language and literacy concepts such as reading and listening comprehension, basic vocabulary, academic language, grammar, phonological awareness, phonics and fluency. As students work through their individualized learning pathway, ongoing assessments gather data on predictive and evaluative checkpoints. These checkpoints determine which upcoming lessons and instructional support options are best for each students. Students who are receiving SETTS and ENL will also be using the Max Scholars program to provide extra support in reading. Max Scholars is an online program that is a comprehensive, multi-sensory, language based reading program. It uses different research based methods that help students improve their reading skills, language and performance scores. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. The ELLs in our building are afforded equal access to all school programs. They participate in all class trips, assemblies, special events, after school programs and extra curricular activities. They all receive AIS instruction during our daily AIS time from 6  2:00-2:40. They are also invited to participate in our after school Young Scholars program that provides test prep for the New York State Math and ELA exams. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our ELLs are immersed in technology in both their regular classroom and the ENL classrooms. Through the use of Smart Boards, laptops, tablets, Mathletics, Brain Pop and computer based research activities our students receive the extra support they need to meet the standards. Our students in grades 3-5 also use Achieve 3000 in school and have access to it at home. Achieve 3000 is a web based, non-fiction reading program that differentiates reading instruction. Each student receives a daily e-mail assignment that is written on his/her own grade level. Teachers and students are provided with immediate feedback with regards to student progress. In addition to technology, we use leveled books, picture dictionaries, maps, charts, graphic organizers, Big Books, picture cards, manipulatives, realia, books on tape and computer software to assist our ELLs in learning language and content. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support in the ENL program is delivered through the use of bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, trade books in the native language, peer tutoring and extra help from our bilingual staff members. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support our ELLs based on age, grade and proficiency level. Students are grouped together to best meet their needs and differentiation is used so that each child can achieve the state-designated level of English proficiency for their grade. Groups are put together by grade level, with no more than 2 grades in the same group. Resources are carefully chosen based on the needs of each individual, taking into account their age and grade level. Services for our ELL-SWD's are adapted to correspond with their age and grade so that we can meet their cognitive needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). :Due to the small ELL population in our school, we currently have no activities to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year. However, should our ELL population continue to increase, we will consider adding a summer language immersion program. Students who enroll throughout the school year are placed in a classroom with another child that speaks their language whenever possible. They are partnered with a buddy in the classroom to help them adjust to the routines and procedures. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Since we do not offer any language electives at PS 52, there are none for ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA 7  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Bimonthly meetings are held by the ELL Supervisor. Professional development focuses on the preparation of lesson plans that support academic rigor and high expectations for ELL students. All information from district and city wide professional development regarding ELL issues in then shared with both administrators and classroom teachers. ENL teachers and teachers of English Language learners have been trained to use SmartBoard technology and the internet to enhance instruction and expose students to 21st Century learning. Teachers also have common planning periods where they collaborate and discuss teachers’ and students’ needs. They identify areas to be addressed and refocused so that instruction to ELLs is enhanced and appropriate interventions implemented. In addition, other Professional Development Workshops are posted on the internet by the Department of Education, UFT workshops and weekend courses. Teachers are exposed to regular professional development on a weekly basis by school administration and will be provided information about the school's Language Allocation Policy as well as the Translation and Interpretation plan. One on one conferences are conducted with the secretary to apprise her of the current mandates and requirements for students and parents of English Language Learners. All teachers, para professionals, special education teachers, the guidance counselor, the parent coordinator and the assistant principal participate in our faculty conferences when professional development is conducted. Professional Development workshops are planned for the entire school year by Administration. During this time teachers collaborate in teams based on grades/subject area and discuss varied topics The ENL teacher attends all professional development at the school level every Monday and Tuesday afternoon, as well as full day staff development as scheduled and also the district-wide meetings for all teachers of ELLS. During these meetings issues related to supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards are addressed and teachers collaborate and share successful strategies for providing ways to help our students meet the standards. The ENL teacher will also attend city wide staff development sessions that pertain to ELL issues. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The guidance counselor focuses on the transition process from elementary to middle school. Workshops will be conducted for parents focusing on the middle school application process for various schools. Parents of ELL's will be invited to these meetings and notices will be sent home in the native language when necessary. Professional Development is scheduled by administration for the entire school year. A portion of all the professional development includes ELL training for staff in using ENL methodologies and strategies to use with English Language Learners. A minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL's. For the ENL teacher, a minimum of 50% of PD will be dedicated to those topics . During grade meetings, teachers are also exposed to ENL methodologies to be used with the English Language Learners in their classrooms. Teachers will document their time as they use a Sign-In sheet which would determine the number of minutes and the topics covered. These sign in sheets would be kept by Administration as evidence of participation. Some of the topics for ENL professional development include: 1. Successful Strategies for English Language Learners 2. Differentiated Instruction for ELLs 3. Stages of Second Language Development   4. Using Technology with English Language Learners 5. Common Core State Standards - ELA/Math 8  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the mandated parent orientation meeting and scheduled parent -teacher conferences, parents will be invited to attend an individual meeting once a year to discuss goals of the program, progress in language acquisition, assessment results and the students individual language development needs in the content area. A letter will be sent home to the parent of each ELL asking that they make an appointment to meet with the teacher at a convenient time so that each child's needs can be addressed. Letters will be sent home in both English and the native language when necessary and phone calls will be made to those parents who do not respond. We will use on-staff translation whenever possible and will utilize the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit by phone if needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are involved in our school in many different ways. We have parent volunteers that assist in the office and in individual classrooms. Our Parents Association holds monthly meetings that address topics that are important to our school community. Our Parent Coordinator also schedules classes that will benefit parents in many ways. We have workshops on Nutrition, Lead Poisoning Prevention, CPR, ARIS, Literacy, and Energy Saving. We even have a book club that meets monthly. Our ELL parents are invited to the initial orientation with the ESL teacher in September and are encouraged to attend all meetings and workshops that are held in the building. Flyers for these meetings are translated into the native language when necessary. Our parent coordinator, Ms. Santana, also sends home notices from the Office of English Language Learners regarding city wide meeting and workshops that relate issues involving ELL students. Our ELL parents are invited to attend all school events like our fashion show,plays, holiday sing alongs, parties, the May Day dance festival and the year end barbeque.Interpretation services will be provided for those who need it by our bilingual staff members and parent volunteers. If necessary, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit and use the over the phone services that are available. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Linda Pough, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 52 School DBN: 29Q52 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Linda Pough Title Principal Deborah Roney Assistant Principal Donna Santana Parent Coordinator Jill Cagan ENL/Bilingual Teacher Anasthacia Mentis Parent Jenae Canty Teacher/Subject Area Joanne Helenese-Barnett Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Coach Coach Rae Haskins School Counselor Beverly Mitchell NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q52 School Name: Public School 52Q Superintendent: Beverly Mitchel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Deborah Jill Jenae Donna Roney Cagan Canty Santana Assistant Principal ELL Teacher SETSS PC No Yes No No Yes Yes Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess our schools written translation and oral interpretation needs, we surveyed our teachers, consulted with the Pupil Accounting Secretary and did a thorough examination of our Home Language Information Surveys and Student Emergency Contact cards. We also spoke with several parents and our bi-lingual personnel in order to determine what types of services were necessary so that all of our parents can receive information in a language they can understand. Finally, we ran the RAPL report in order to confirm our findings. Although 94% of our parents stated that English is their preferred language, we do have a number of parents that speak and read in Spanish, with smaller numbers indicating French or Haitian Creole. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Ewe French Haitian Creole English Punjabi Spanish Urdu 1 2 1 4 7 396 1 24 2 0.23 0.46 0.23 0.91 1.6 90.41 0.23 5.48 0.46 1 2 1 4 7 395 1 25 2 0.23 0.46 0.23 0.91 1.6 90.18 0.23 5.71 0.46 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Newsletters bi-monthly Event Letters as needed PT Conferences September, November, March and May Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We will use the DOE Intranet template for covered languages. We will also use school-based personnel for translation support as well as the DOE vendor "The Big Word." for non-covered languages. We will use the DOE Intranet template for covered languages. We will also use school-based personnel for translation support. For non-covered languages we will use "The Big Word" We will use the DOE Intranet template for covered languages. We will also 3  IEP as needed use school-based personnel for translation support as well as the DOE vendor, "The Big Word" and the over the phone interpretation service. We will use translation vendors as needed to support the School Based Support Team in the completion of IEPs (The Big Word) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings PT Conferences September, November, March and May School Events as needed How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We will use bi-lingual school based personnel for Spanish, Haitian Creole and French. For all other languages we will use the over the phone interpretation service. We will use bi-lingual school based personnel and the over the phone interpretation service. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 4  We will create a bi-lingual emergency team to contact our limited-English-proficient families in the event of a school emergency. The team will work exclusively with our ENL or ELL students to contact the families and to keep them abreast of the situation at hand. We will also use the over the phone interpretation service for assistance as needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During our September professional development session we will distribute Regulation A-663 and discuss its importance to our school community. Our ENL/ELL teachers will also provide bi-monthly professional development workshops on Reg. A-663. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 we will provide written notification of parents rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate languages. We will include how to obtain these services in our school and what services are available. Parents will also be directed to the DOE website to receive further information about their rights. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will create a survey for our limited-English-proficient families regarding the language services they receive at the school. Surveys will be translated into other languages using the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit. For non- covered languages, we will use the services of "The Big Word". We will use the data gathered to improve and better support our ENL and ELL families. 5 
