 24Q058 School Name: P.S. 58 - SCHOOL OF HEROES Principal: ADELINA V. TRIPOLI   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: The School of Heroes BEDS Code: Grades Served: Kindergarten-Sixth Grade School Number (DBN): 24Q58 School Address: 72-24 Grand Avenue Maspeth, N.Y. 11378 Phone Number: 718-533-6754 Fax: 718-533-6794 School Contact Person: Email Address: atripol@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Adelina Valastro-Tripoli Theresa Diaz Jennifer Losito Theresa Diaz Jennifer Losito n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent: Madeline Chan 98-50 50th Ave. Corona, NY 11368 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: Mchan2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-592-3357 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Executive Director: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address:   Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Adelina Valastro-Tripoli *Principal or Designee Theresa Diaz Jennifer Losito Marie Walters Jennifer Losito Robert Barrese Debra Zampelli Jill Lettieri Tom Sellers VivianaAndino Melissa Gonzalez Mauricio Gonzalez *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nicole Losito Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school’s mission is to enable and ensure that all students will strive for and achieve academic excellence, as well as an appreciation of the fine arts. We truly believe that all children can and will learn. We will accomplish this mission by providing the highest quality education, addressing the academic, social and emotional needs of every child, as we instill student autonomy through the Leader in Me program. P.S. 58 has the distinct vision to provide each student with the ability to successfully master the curriculum, as well as instill the love of knowledge.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 58 The School of Heroes is located in Maspeth, Queens. We are located in a community of diverse backgrounds where we are presented with the educational task of providing students with worthwhile, meaningful learning experiences that will be necessary to become productive citizens. Our school’s mission is to enable and ensure that each and every student will strive and achieve academic excellence as well as develop an appreciation of the fine arts. We truly believe that all children can and will learn. We will accomplish this mission by providing the highest quality of education, addressing the academic, social, and emotional needs of every child. P.S. 58 has the distinct vision to provide each student with the ability to successfully master the rudiments of learning as well as instill and appreciate a love of knowledge. All classes are provided with Academic Intervention Services (AIS) incorporating all groups (ELL, Special Education, and General Education). Children are selected based on data analysis such as; iReady reports, diagnostics, informal assessment and teacher recommendations. Students who are identified as potential referrals for special education are placed in a Remedial Tiered Instruction (RTI) program. Students are pulled out in a small group in a designated location and serviced 2-3 times a week by either a special education or general education instructional leader depending on their needs. After a 6-8 week cycle, the students are reassessed to determine their need for additional intervention services or a placement into a smaller group with. Parents are welcome to come in and discuss their child’s progress during Parent Engagement time. Our school community incorporated the Common Core Learning Standards instructional shifts in several ways that have made an impact on teaching practices. In order to provide multiple entry points for all students we created individualized student folders. Using this system, teachers are able to easily identify areas individual students excel in and areas they are in need of support. This type of differentiated instruction allows students time to work in groups that target their needs. This also allows them to self-assess and become active participants in their learning. Using their notebooks, students are able to reflect on the daily activities and their achievements. Another tool teachers use to support students is individualized student feedback. After meeting with students, teachers will offer glow and grows. Recording comments allows teachers to see a student’s growth and identify if goals are being met. Our computer programs such as MyOn and iReady allow for additional support to students who are at risk, and those in need of additional enrichment. This year we have continued to make project- based learning a focus. We continued school wide S.T.E.M (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) and CS4All programs that are aligned to one another. Students dive deeper into English Language Arts curriculum and create projects that reflect their learning and are aligned to the CCLS. This is accomplished within the school, as well as, during field trips that reflect the curriculum. In the upcoming year we will embark on a new city wide science program called Amplify Science. One way our school community encourages and promotes high levels of student thinking and participation is through Socratic Seminars. Students are given a higher-order thinking question that provokes dialogue and conversation in the classroom. They research the topic and write an argumentative essay. Once the research is complete students participate in a Socratic Seminar where they discuss their opinions, ideas and evidence. Through this activity they question each other’s thinking and encourage others to speak and participate. They then evaluate their performance, in order to pinpoint areas they excel in and areas that they need to continue to develop. In the 2017-2018 school year vocabulary was a focus for our horizontal and vertical teacher teams. Student’s scores were measured using iReady. Vocabulary scores increased as measured by the end of year iReady scores. Although there was growth, teachers noticed that the vocabulary was used in isolation in their reading. Goals for the 2018-2019 school year is to increase the student vocabulary use within their writing pieces as well as poetry. (5A-Rigorous Instruction) 0  Additionally, our school implemented a weekly social emotional session. Next year, we plan to delve deeper into the Sanford Harmony and Leader in Me programs in order to develop self-esteem in our students. (5B-Supportive Environment) P.S. 58 established several ways to build a partnership with families to support students’ progress towards college and career readiness. At Admittance Day, parents are given materials and informed of the expectations, implementation, and importance of the agenda books. Parents will use the agenda book as a form of on going communication, checking child’s homework daily, and signing assessments. Parent Engagement forums take place every Tuesday. The purpose of the educational forums is to provide parents with additional support. These forums are hosted by the Principal, Assistant Principals, and staff members. Parents are invited to a “Meet and Greet” and Parent-teacher Conferences, where new families are given a variety of publications highlighting PS 58. Some examples are a school magazine, school policy handbook, grade-wide brochures and newsletters highlighting the curriculum and special events/programs for the month. Upon request current families can receive these publications. Parents are given reports and feedback based on their child’s performance on diagnostic exams, Unit Assessments, Go Math Performance Assessments, and individual lessons. Monthly parent newsletters are created highlighting Principal’s Homework and special events by the parent coordinator. Student Goals are back-packed home for parents to review. Parents receive surveys requesting their input on activities and events taking place throughout the year in an effort to promote a cohesive home-school partnership. In order to meet the needs of our diverse parent population, all written correspondence is translated into multiple languages. Currently approximately five to 10 percent of parents participate in school events. Our goal is to increase this amount by approximately five percent through a variety of parent outreach. (5E-Strong Family and community Ties) In reviewing last year’s Comprehensive Educational Plan it was determined that our school showed the most improvement in reading and math through the use of the iReady web-based program, and we will continue to enhance, monitor, and analyze students’ progress vertically and horizontally. Lastly, school leadership will provide teachers with tailored professional development and input in order to develop instructional techniques. Specifically, two components from the Danielson Rubric where selected as a main focus based on teachers’ observation reports from the previous school year. (5D-Effective School Leadership) As component 3B from the Danielson Rubric is an area of weakness, teachers will be collaborating in various groups to create a questioning manual that will be used as a resource for all classes. The goal is to increase scores in this component. (5C- Collaborative Teachers) To this end, working together, we will be able to reach our collective and individual goals. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school services students with a variety of academic needs. Each grade level has 1-2 ICT classes, as well a special class with a 12:1:1 ratio. In addition, we have ENL students serviced in a variety of general education classrooms. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. On the 2017-2018 CEP, our goal for rigorous instruction involved 1  improving student vocabulary scores. We had great success with this and plan to broaden the goal for next year by measuring student ability to use their improved vocabulary in context. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q058 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1027 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 74 71 41 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 41 41 5 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 65.5% % Reduced Lunch 13.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 38.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 19.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.2 0% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 58.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 95% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 108 104 41 95.3% 10.4% 16.7% 0.9% 39.8% 1.2% 6 18% 7.9 54.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Within the 2017-2018 school year the focus of our horizontal and vertical teams was improving students’ vocabulary skills schoolwide. Scores on iready diagnostic tests were used as a baseline. A variety of strategies were implemented in the classrooms. Scores improved across the grades. However, teachers noticed that while students understood the vocabulary words in isolation, they were not implementing them within their writing. Our focus for the upcoming year will be to improve students’ word choice within their writing pieces across the genres. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018-2019 school year, 50% of the student population K-6 including SWDs and ENLs will increase at least one half level , as measured by a school designed word choice rubric. Growth will be analyzed by comparing scores from benchmark, mid-term and end-term narrative writing pieces 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All grades will use Wordly Wise program to expand students vocabulary. Teacher teams will collaborate to design a grade specific rubric to measure word choice within a narrative writing piece. The rubric will be introduced to the students prior to the benchmark writing assessment. Every classroom with have a vocabulary/word choice area. Students will be exposed to new vocabulary in a variety of ways. Students will be encouraged to focus on including more descriptive vocabulary within their writing. A vocabulary parade will be held in June as a culminating activity. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Early Childhood Grades K-2 Early Childhood Grades K-2 Early Childhood Grades K-2 Early Childhood Grades K-2 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 5  We will invite parents to workshops that highlight vocabulary skills. Parents will be invited to participate with their child in the vocabulary parade. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will provide instruction to Pre K to sixth g6  rade students. Ready Gen and Wordly Wise will continue to be pro7  vided. An existing schedule for AIS services will continue con8  tingent on funding. All information will be provided to parent9  s in a timely manner and translated using Google Translator to t0  he best of the school’s ability. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Students’ performance will be assessed on a continuing basis. In January of 2019, students will write a narrative midpoint piece to assess growth in word choice. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Students’ performance will be assessed using the grade specific word choice rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As we have moved into our second year of Leader in Me, we also incorporated a weekly social emotional session. We addressed a number of social emotional issues. Next year, we would like to explore how these sessions are affecting the children. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018-2019 school year 40% of students will show improved self-esteem and self-awareness as measured by student reflection pages as well as self-esteem rating scales. Parents will also fill out a rating scale to give their feedback on how their child has grown. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). One period per week will be dedicated to social emotional learning. The Sanford Harmony program as well as Leader in Me will be utilized. The Sanford Harmony program focuses on diversity, empathy, communication skills, problem solving and peer-relationships. Leader in Me focuses on the 7 Habits. Students will be given the opportunity to earn badges based upon positive behaviors that are displayed by the students throughout the month. Parents will be given an inventory scale to complete based on their perception of their child’s self-esteem. The survey will be given to the parents at the end of the year to measure growth. A school wide reward system will be implemented to recognize positive behavior and choices that reflect the 7 Habits. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 All students from Pre-Kindergarten to Sixth Grade All students from Pre-Kindergarten to Sixth Grade All students from Pre-Kindergarten to Sixth Grade All students from Pre-Kindergarten to Sixth Grade Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, School Support Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, School Support Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, School Support Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, School Support Staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are given a voice through the self-esteem inventory based on their child. 4  Additionally the students will be able to share their leadership binders with their parents to highlight their successes and progress towards goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Necessary materials needed for presentation and promotion of events will be provided as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will be asked to reflect and assess the success of these initiatives in January 2019. As needed, changes will be made. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Growth will be assessed based on student self-esteem inventories. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers have participated in a book club using the book, The Art of Questioning. The Danielson rubric component 3B has been a school wide focus. There was improvement in teachers’ scores for use of higher order questioning. The team wants to work on making higher order questions more prevalent and natural in every lesson. Resources will be provided for teachers to achieve this goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will collaborate in teams and professional development groups to create resources that will help to immerse the staff in higher order questioning on a more regular basis. Scores on observations in the Danielson framework will be used 6  as a measurement tool. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development will be given in higher order questioning. Teachers will collaborate on individual grades to create higher order questioning manual. Model classrooms will be available to visit at scheduled times to learn best practices focusing on questioning. Teacher teams will research to find other resources available to assist teachers with higher order questioning. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 All teachers from Kindergarten to 6th grade All teachers from Kindergarten to 6th grade All students from Pre-Kindergarten to Sixth Grade All students from Pre-Kindergarten to Sixth Grade Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, paraprofessionals Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, paraprofessionals Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers and Paraprofessionals Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers and Paraprofessionals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Workshops will be provided to parents to educate them on higher order questioning. An at home questioning book will be provided. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8 Prof essional development will be provided within the school. Less9  ons will be conducted in the classrooms by teachers. Questioni0  ng resources will be purchased using school budget. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 1  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-year, administrators will meet and reflect on the mid-year scores for component 3B on the Danielson rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Danielson rubric will be used to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In reviewing teacher observations the areas of need we noticed are student engagement specifically differentiation (Component 3C) and feedback and assessment (Component 3D). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Within the 2018-2019 school year, school leaders will create a professional development plan targeting improved instructional techniques as measured by overall scores on the Danielson rubric in components 3C, and 3D. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Mondays will be used for differentiated professional development tailored to the needs of the staff. Some possibilities will be conducting inter-visitation to focus on teaching through carousel walks and Socratic seminars. By doing this, teachers will foster student autonomy. Model classrooms will be available to visit at scheduled times to learn best practices. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Pre K-6 6/18-6/19 Administration Variety of technology programs will be utilized such as; Ready Gen, Go Math/ Think Central, i Ready ELA/Math, My Access Writing Program, MyOn, Encyclopedia and, Brain Pop in order to engage students in lessons. All teachers Pre K-6 6/18-6/19 Administration SmartBoards and Promethean Boards in all classrooms will be used as a tool for interactive lessons. A select group of instructional leaders have been trained in Computer Science For All (CS4All) curriculum. Students are taught coding and programming with the use of I pads and robots. The instructional leaders will turn-key their knowledge in order to expand the program. After individual observations, teachers will be provided with immediate feedback from administration. Teachers will have the opportunity to reflect and respond. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers Pre K-6 All teachers Pre K-6 6/18-6/19 Administration 6/18-6/19 Administration All teachers 6/18-6/19 Administration Pre K-6 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be made aware of the Advance system and the observation process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional development will be provided in house. The existing curriculum will be provided by the school. All classrooms are currently equipped with Smart or Promethean Boards. 4  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data from 2017-2018 Danielson Observations will be used as a benchmark for components 3C, and 3D. In February 2019 observations completed to that point will be used to decide if improvements in these components have been noticed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from 2017-2018 Danielson Observations will be used as a benchmark for components 3C, and 3D. In February 2018 observations completed to that point will be used to decide if improvements in these components have been noticed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Historically, parent involvement within school wide events has been between 5 and 10%. Our goal is to increase the parent involvement percentages through varied school wide events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Within the 2018-2019 school year, our goal is to increase parent involvement to 10 to 15% as measured by exit slips completed by parents after each event. Parents will be provided with multiple opportunities to observe and or participate in events with their child. 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 Parents Principal, assistant principals, parent coordinator, teachers Principal, assistant principals, parent coordinator, teachers Principal, assistant principals, parent coordinator, teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During Admittance Day, parents will be afforded the opportunity to sign up for at least one event within the school year. Parents will be provided with a calendar of the upcoming years' events in order give them ample time to arrange their schedules. Reminders will be sent to parents one week before the event that they signed up to attend. In the past, the monthly physical challenges had been the parents observing their child performance. This year, the Monthly physical challenges will be opened to parents participating with their child, in order to promote increased parent involvement. Monthly grade specific special events will also afford parents the opportunity to increase parent involvement. Parents 9/18-6/19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. All parts of this initiative will be completed in school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A master calendar of events will be created by staff members. Robo-calls and parent communication apps will be utilized to send reminders. Materials for events will provided by the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. School sign-in sheets will be utilized to tally the parent attendance on a monthly basis. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School sign-in sheets and exit slips will measure the amount of parents present at each event. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Response to Intervention Services (RTI) for children in K-6 anticipated to be placed in Special Education. AIS services will be provided to students who are on the cusp of being on standard to bring them to to grade level. Certified ENL teachers will provide services to ENL students. Response to Intervention Services (RTI) for children in K-6 anticipated to be placed in Special Education. . AIS services will be provided to students who are on the cusp of being on standard to bring them to to grade level. Certified ENL teachers will provide services to ENL students. Response to Intervention Services (RTI) for children in K-6 anticipated to be placed in Special Education. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Comprehension –Strategies and techniques, language acquisition. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction One period during the school day. Small group instruction One period during the school day. -High-Order Thinking Skills -Multi-Step Word Problems -Constructed extended response questions. Comprehension –Strategies and techniques. Small group instruction One period during the school day. 9 Comprehension –Strategies and techniques. Small group instruction One period during the school day. Emotional and Social support Whole class, small group, and/or one-to-one During the school day. Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Response to Intervention Services (RTI) for children in K-6 anticipated to be placed in Special Education. Referrals and recommendations for services will be determined based on the needs of individual students in grade PreK-6. A behavior support team will assist teachers as needed to develop behavioral strategies to use in the classroom. 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 27 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students receive check-in counseling services from the guidance counselor. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Every Instructional Leader is placed in their licensed area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers and paraprofessionals are given professional development for 80 minutes on scheduled Mondays. Professional development is based on GO Math, I-Ready, and Ready GEN programs, as well as a variety of programs in other subject areas. . Lead teachers sent for professional development, and will turnkey resources and information. Mentors and model teachers within the school provide additional support for teachers. Teachers will meet periodically in horizontal and vertical teams in order to align the curriculum, as well as provide students with necessary scaffolding and support. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-Kindergarten students and parents will be invited to orientation in the Fall. A tour of the building will be provided to both parents and students to become familiar with both the building and the staff. Parents will also be invited to “Admittance Day” and will receive a brochure with all pertinent school information. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will meet periodically in horizontal and vertical teams in order to align the curriculum, as well as provide students with necessary scaffolding and support. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $416,692.00 $ 83,710.00 n/a n/a $5,939,735.00 X X Page 23, 26 n/a n/a Page 14, 17, 20, 23 4  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 5  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 58, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 58 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; Workshops will be provided on the following topics; grade-specific curriculum, school culture, ways to assist children with preparing for the state examinations, program overviews of the STEAM and foreign language program, an overview of the Leader in Me program, workshops to develop student autonomy and budget workshops with a liaison from the Title 1 Parent Committee;  fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress through students’ iReady score reports, agenda books provided to parents as a means of communication, in addition to regular availability for meetings during family engagement time and at the quarterly parent teacher conferences, brochures sent home communicating parent involvement opportunities, and report cards and progress reports sent home based on I Ready and MyOn programs  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; through the presentation of Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) workshops, as well as providing information on 7   ways to be involved in their child’s education through the Community Education Council (CEC) calendar and School Leadership Team (SLT) calendar and minutes. sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; by translating all school notices and calls into the languages that are prominent in our school community through the use of Google Translate, providing a variety of workshops to help meet the needs of the children, in addition to those listed above and offering weekly English lessons to interested parents.  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; by holding bi-monthly family engagement activities/events that promote cultural diversity and character education.  providing workshops introducing school policies and programs to parents of incoming Pre-K and K students, as well as families who have transferred into our school. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. In house surveys and reflections based on school activities will be distributed and collected in order to obtain feedback on ways to improve various school events. Seasonal parent breakfasts will be used as a forum for parent concerns. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; including the Cornell Healthy Habits workshop, workshops on the importance of leaning a foreign language, lessons to teach parents basic Italian, forums on a variety of topics held during Family Engagement Time and evening workshops on a variety of topics offered on a monthly basis  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of 8   events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the Parent Coordinator Activity Report; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: ESL workshops, fitness opportunities, parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; facilitated by teachers and administrators according to parent availability  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; on a bi-monthly basis  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent- Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events; such as Very Important Person (VIP) Day, Parents As Teachers Day, and a vocabulary parade linked with the Principal’s homework  establishing a Parent Resource Center; instructional materials for parents; available through the Parent Coordinator  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a parent newsletter designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing agendas for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand.  Continuing to welcome parents from the P.9 unit to all meetings and events School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 58, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 9  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I.School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities to parents of  participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact by having the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and SLT minutes available for parents to review and by giving updates to parents at monthly PTA meetings  providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 0  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents     creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; as practical and to the extent funding allows  ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; I. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  encourage my child to follow all school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks; read with my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;    · promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about his/her educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school and/or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact, as often as possible;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to  learn more about teaching and learning strategies as often as possible; take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams as often as possible; 1   share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; I. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities follow all school rules and be responsible for my actions; attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow all school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn         practice and follow the 7 Habits within my own life. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3 3 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Begin description here: P.S. 58Q will use the Title III funding to have an After-School Program for ELL students with the greatest need in grades 3 through 6. This program is above and beyond mandated requirements and compliments our ENL services. The rationale for this program is to address the need to improve ELL performance on New York State assessments. The ELL students will receive supplementary support to help them achieve higher grades on the NYSESLAT as well as New York State ELA and Math assessments. The program will target students in grades 3 through 6 with the greatest need based on data. The program will primarily target students identified through current data (i-Ready, NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, RLAT, MOSL) and students who previously scored EN or EM on the NYSESLAT. Students will also be considered who scored a level 1 or 2 on NYS ELA or Math. MOSL data, classroom performance and teacher recommendation may also be used. 60% of the Title III funding will be spent on direct instruction. The after school program will be structured as follows: 3 to 5 ENL certified teachers (depending on enrollment) will each have one group not to exceed 15 students each, two days a week. The total number of students served will be 80 to 110 depending upon parental choice to enroll. 1 Administrator will oversee the program to ensure quality instruction and safety. The program length will be 2 days per week for 2 hours per day. The program will begin the week of January 7, 2019 and run through the week of April 22, 2019. The after school program run from 14:35 to 16:35. The language of instruction will be English. The program will be taught by 3 ENL certified teachers. 20% of the Title III funding will be spent on supplies & materials for the after school program. These will include materials which focus on language and grammar development including flash cards, games student book/workbook sets and realia. Also included will be New York State ELA and Math materials different from those in use in the classrooms during the regular school day. These materials will be for the sole use of the after school Title III program above and beyond mandated instruction and will not be used during the regular school day. Student and teacher materials such as folders, notebooks, reproducible worksheets, copy paper and additional materials for use in the after school program may be purchased with Title III funding. 4  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Staff Development will be provided to train the teachers and administrators who are directly involved in implementing the after school program. Staff development will be provided at the start of the program in a session for 2 hours from 14:35 to 16:35. The two-hour staff development session will be held in the week before the start of the program in order to assure optimal student grouping, teacher preparedness and availability of appropriate materials. The staff development will focus on appropriate grouping of students and lesson planning and initial assessment of students in order to determine strategies for the greatest positive impact on ELL performance. The purpose of staff development will be to assure the best practices in student identification and placement, selection of materials, lesson planning, teaching, and assessment of student progress. Another initial Staff Development may be planned if deemed necessary. The next staff development will occur midpoint in the program for 2 hours from 14:35 to 16:35. The focus will be on assessing student progress and determining next steps. Students may be assigned to different groups at this point. This will positively impact students by ensuring proper placement and educational practices. A final staff development will be provided at the end of the program for 2 hours from 14:35 to 16:35. The staff development will focus on final evaluation of student progress and reporting the results to teachers and parents. Next steps for classroom teachers and students will be developed at this point. This will positively impact students by continuing the progress after the end of the program. Records for all staff developments will be maintained through taking attendance and maintaining ongoing records of staff participation and agendas. The purpose of staff development will be to assure the best practices in student identification and placement, selection of materials, lesson planning, teaching , and assessment of student progress. This staff development will not be used for mandated professional development. Staff development sessions for ongoing program assessment and revision may be planned on days when the after school program is not scheduled. Staff Development may also be scheduled at the conclusion of the program for assessment of progress. Topics may include: • Identification of students with the greatest need • assuring optimal student placement and grouping • finding, purchasing and creating suitable materials • developing appropriate instruction • assessing student needs and progress • revising direct instruction Teachers and administrators involved in the after school program may present to each other on topics with which they are familiar or have a degree of expertise. Sources may be brought in for specific staff development or consultation if it is deemed beneficial. Names of Providers, translators and or consultants may include the following: Mr. George Xu (ENL/Technology Teacher), Mr. Peter Faherty (ENL Teacher, Ms. Teresa LaBarbera (Assistant Principal of ENL), Maria Agugliaro (Parent Coordinator) 5 Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 10% of the Title III funding will be spent on parent involvement. Information for parents will be made accessible through translated letters. Parents will be informed of the purpose, schedule, and content of the after school program through letters which will be sent out in English and the appropriate other languages. We will hold one one-hour workshop in the week before the start of the after school program to prepare parents to be able to help their children to be successful. The session will provide parents with an overview of the program, the materials to be used and to provide suggestions and assistance in how parents can help their children at home. If any Internet or technology resources are to be used we will assist parents in learning how to use the resources as well as find alternatives if technology or Internet is not available in the home. Another one-hour workshop will be held at the midpoint of the program in order to report on student progress and provide parents with information and strategies they can employ to increase student success. At this presentation, parents will be provided with the results of the midpoint assessments and informed of next steps for their children as determined by the educators in the program. Another one-hour workshop will be held at the conclusion of the after school program in order to provide parents with up-to-date data on their child’s test preparedness and to provide information parents can use to help their children to maintain and continue to develop the progress they have made. These parent informational workshops will be presented by the teachers and administrators responsible for the program. These are above and beyond any communication with parents conducted during time provided during time contractually provided on Tuesdays for meeting with parents. Names of Providers, translators and or consultants may include the following: Mr. George Xu (ENL/Technology Teacher), Mr. Peter Faherty (ENL Teacher), Ms. Teresa LaBarbera (Assistant Principal of ENL), Maria Agugliaro (Parent Coordinator) During the course of the after school program, parents will receive all necessary updates and information in translated form as te need arises. For parent workshops, George Xu will be on hand for Chinese translation. The parents will be notified, in writing, in a variety of languages (in their preferred language of choice) of these workshops. The notifications will be sent home in the students' home folders. Flyers will also be posted in various languages on the Parent Notification Bulletin Board 6 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities at the Main Entrance. Our Parent Coordinator will also share the information with parents and be a part of the notification process. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name The School of Heroes Borough Queens School Number 058 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Adelina Valastro Tripoli Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher P.Faherty,C.Braico,E.Csillik Teacher/Subject Area George Xu, Technology Teacher/Subject Area Suzanne Duroseau, Math Related-Service Provider Kathleen DaCosta, Speech Superintendent Madeline Chan Assistant Principal Teresa LaBarbera, Anna Giudice Coach N/A School Counselor Tina Wright Parent Jennifer Losito Parent Coordinator Maria Agugliaro Field Support Center Staff Member Guivela Leisengang Other (Name and Title) Christine Arundel, A.P. C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 8  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1020 Total number of ELLs 202 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.80% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments that our school uses to guide the instructional planning of our ELLs are: Teacher-created Unit based/content-based Vocabulary assessments for every subject (for baseline and growth – given 3 times per year), The I-Ready Reading and Math Program (assessments given quarterly - that determines and measures each of the students' math and Lexile levels), READY NY Learning Standards test practice program (has practice assessments within the program), MOSL (NYC Performance Task) as a baseline and progress indicator, as well as Unit Assessments from Ready Gen Reading and Writing Program given every unit, and the teachers’ unit and chapter assessments within the classroom for all content areas. Teachers regularly set unit goals for grouped students and have an assessment at the beginning and end of each unit. We use these assessment programs which are aligned to the NYS Learning Standards. Teachers will then use this all this various data to guide 9  differentiated instruction, grouping, and planning for ELLs. We also use the results of the ELA, State Math, State Science, NYSITELL and NYSESLAT to guide our instructional planning for ELLs as we look at which modality the students are strongest or weakest in from the NYSESLAT. We do this by analyzing the RLAT report from ATS and then considering all those results as we plan for our ELLs. We also use rubrics for each task given to our students as well as give “next steps”. This provides valuable insight into the strengths and needs of our ELL students on a more regular basis. Teachers have the option of using the Ready Gen rubrics provided in the Teacher's Guide as well as often creating their own project specific rubrics. Cluster and STEAM Teachers assist with this planning as well and have their own rubrics and next steps for project-based learning. Finally, our data specialist creates graphs and pie charts to view progress for these assessments. The data from these curriculum-embedded assessments will continue to help inform our school's instructional plan by giving us information about our ELL students' needs that will assist with lesson planning, grouping, differentiation, tailored activities, scaffolding, vocabulary development and creating future learning goals. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have many structures in place to support this effort. In our Vertical and Horizontal Teams (which meet on Mondays and Tuesdays), we sit, share, and analyze all the data collected. In addition, teachers bring work samples of students to look at as a group and plan what other assessments and instruction might be valuable to our students We then have team discussions on how we will move forward (a plan of action). Quarterly, we analyze and use the results of these assessments to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the students. All assessment data is collected, entered, and available in Google Docs for the staff to access. Our Technology Teacher keeps this data updated on a very regular basis and shares it with the staff. We then use the results and data to drive instruction and form groups of students that have similar areas of need. They are also good predictors of student performance in upcoming state exams as well as in the classroom. These results are used to differentiate and scaffold lessons in order to enhance teaching practices. They are a primer for advanced/intensive planning and preparation of lessons to meet each student’s individual learning needs. They are also used for grouping within content areas and as a baseline for monitoring the progress of the student’s educational gains throughout the school year. We run and analyze the RLAT report every two months (sometimes more often) (as well as looking at informal data collected from our teachers – examples: writing samples, group and individual projects, running records) reveals that ELLs generally have more difficulty with reading and writing components, specifically vocabulary portions. ELL students’ listening and speaking skills are stronger overall (and seem to show the most growth at a faster pace), especially with ELLs who have been enrolled in school for more than one year. We use this, and all data, to drive instruction. All teachers, including ENL teachers, refer to and update a folder where all of this information is kept and recorded. Teachers then keep their own personal notes on the data for reference and grouping purposes. We analyze this data on a regular basis in order to see what areas we must focus on to help our ELL students. Our data specialist continues to collect all the information from the teachers and creates charts and graphs for continued reference. Instructional groups are flexible and adjusted accordingly. We also look at other factors - such as the students' attendance records and work together with our Pupil Accounting Secretary to check on attendance, and holdover information. We stay updated on SIFE students, potential long term ELLs, referrals to special education, and NYSESLAT, ELA and Math results. We do this in our Vertical ENL Team and share any data collected with other teams. The ENL team then meets with administrators and co-teachers to formulate a list of action such as RTI, AIS, and possible Small Group Instruction to name a few. We implement all srtategies and modify based on student needs. All Horizontal and Vertical teams are provided with Professional Development on data collecting and data analysis. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The baseline/benchmark assessments that our school uses to identify baseline progress and areas of need for our ELLs are: NYSITELL (baseline and areas of need), NYSESLAT (progress and areas of need), I-Ready Reading and Math Program assessments, Ready Gen Reading/Writing Program, MOSL (NYC Performance Task), Unit Assessments from Ready Gen Reading Program, and the teachers’ classroom unit assessments. For example, we now have incorporated a Vocabulary Baseline in each classroom for all content areas. This assessment is given quarterly in order to measure the growth of the students’ vocabulary which has been identified as an area of need at P.S. 58. Students are given a set of vocabulary words as a baseline, the words are incorporated into the lessons with meaning and repetition, and then the students are assessed on their growth using these words at the end of the unit. We take what we have learned from any PD sessions, and apply it in order to figure 0  out and identify more areas of need. We also use the results of the MOSL (NYC Performance Task) to identify baseline, progress and areas of need; as well as the I-Ready assessment program four times per year to check Lexile levels, growth and progress in reading as well as Math levels and progress. All documentation of progress in kept in Google Docs. Teachers will then continue to use this data to guide instruction and planning for ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures we have in place in order to address the interventions once the summative data has been gathered are that administrators, classroom teachers, and ENL Teachers meet as a team to communicate and make joint recommendations for cycles of RTI or AIS. The students are serviced within the cycles of RTI or AIS based on the area of need. Students are then checked for progress and growth after each cycle in order to see what the next plan of action should be (such as recommendation for another cycle or a potential referral). The school leadership and teachers use the results and data to determine the progress ELL students have made and where students need to make more progress. We do this by reviewing the results of any assessments and analyzing which sections the students seem to have the most trouble with. Each child may have different results, so this is taken into consideration. Once areas of concern have been identified, strategies are implemented to target specific areas of student need. As previously stated, we stay updated on students attendance records and work together with our Pupil Accounting Secretary to continually check on attendance, SIFE and holdover information. We stay updated on potential long term ELLs, referrals to special education, new special education placements, and NYSESLAT, ELA,Math, and Science results. We discuss all of this (and more) this in our Vertical ENL Team and continue to share any data collected with other Vertical and Horizontal teams. The ENL team regularly meets with administrators and co-teachers to formulate a list of action such as RTI, AIS, and possible Small Group Instruction to name a few. We implement all strategies and modify these strategies based on student needs. All Horizontal and Vertical teams are provided with Professional Development on data collecting and data analysis. ENL teachers also monitor all Commanding ELLs on a regular basis to be sure that the 90 minutes of ENL support service is adequate and helpful. We will be following up with the Alternative Pathways to Support Former English Language Learners, and will consider Option A, B, or C for certain students - but for the most part, will try to keep Option D (90 minutes of integrated ENL) in order to support these students and address any interventions that they may need carefully. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS): For each English Language Learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, our school determines additional support services to provide to the student, taking into consideration evidence such as the following: - Number of years of instruction in a bilingual education or English as a new language program - English and home language literacy - Content area and social-emotional support needs of students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) - English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs - Results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam - Bilingual education or English as a second language teacher recommendation - Content area teacher recommendation - Parent or guardian request - Sample of student work in English and, if possible, in the home language - Bilingual educational evaluation, if the student has or is suspected of having a disability The support services are aligned to any intervention plans (e.g., Academic Intervention Services) the school is already providing to all students. There are RTI resources for ELL educators on the DELLSS’ website. Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework in many different ways. After examining our data, we group students accordingly based on their needs. ELL students are recommended for RTI small group instruction based on test score results and teacher recommendation. We then set goals for our students, and plan lessons and activities based on 1  our data. We use data-driven instruction, and differentiated instruction. We scaffold for our students but always try to keep instruction rigorous and challenging. We also refer to the RTI Guide for Teachers of ELLs for more information. "The foundation of RTI for ELLs is high-quality core, or Tier 1, instruction focused on promoting language and literacy development. Only once a rigorous, effective instructional core is in place — one that targets the student population’s needs on a daily basis as part of a long-term plan — can we begin to build interventions that will serve as truly supplemental and supportive instruction." At P.S. 58 we will continue to focus on strong core instruction. We will use instructional strategies that support differentiated, Tier 1 instruction to promote ELLs’ literacy development. We will focus specifically on: Developing different key domains of literacy, to support reading, writing, listening, and speaking. We also present instruction that makes direct and appropriate connections to ELLs’ community values, identities, and first languages. "Building students’ oral language skills means teaching specialized vocabulary (and the often-abstract concepts such words represent), as well as the specialized structures of language in academic speech and text — often referred to as elements of academic language." Instruction that promotes oral language development is rich in both language and content. In these learning environments, students have opportunities to learn about, study, and discuss the language of texts. They then use this text-based content learning in interactive experiences like labs, demonstrations, and speeches, that promote academic conversation and growth of knowledge. Strategies that promote ELLs’ oral language development must be incorporated throughout the school day. These strategies include, but are not limited to: -Start with rich text and big ideas so students learn about the world. -Preview key concepts and difficult vocabulary, as well as reviewing students’ understanding of important points. -When possible, draw on and use students’ home languages -Use varied vocabulary and concepts in order to build students' oral language that is rich in language and content. -Use varied sentence structures in order to develop students' use of elements of academic language -Ask open-ended questions during lessons; engage students in discussion about ideas in the text -Include relevant multicultural literature as well as multicultural chants, songs, and poems that help to build phonemic awareness. -Storytelling using wordless books. -Devote instructional planning and time to student projects that are discussion-based. -During discussions, ask open-ended questions to promote academic conversation and growth of knowledge. -Use the "A-List": Essential Academic Words (by Jim Burke) -Use "Colorful Words" to build vocabulary -Use Academic Vocabulary within all lessons - Follow the "Hallmarks" of vocabulary - Use as many resources as possible to target the building on language skills 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data from the NYSESLAT, ELA, State Math, and State Science exams is always used to evaluate and inform our ELL Programs. We may use the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) which combines information from three ATS reports and creates information for us to analyze and use to make plans for our ELL programs. We also use the RLAT from ATS on a very regular and consistent basis. This report is really a great “go-to” for information about our ELLs and their modalities needs. We us it to analyze and evaluate as much as we can and re-print it as new students come in. P.S. 58 always studies and analyzes all patterns across NYSESLAT modalities each year, and uses the results to make instructional decisions (such as grouping). The results for the NYSESLAT modalities show that students in P.S. 58 are reaching high levels on the tests in the listening and speaking modalities, and that in most cases their scores are being lowered by the results in the reading and writing modalities. This demonstrates that the students are being successful at BICS and are ready to achieve comparable success in CALP. Since approximately 50 percent of our ELL students have 0 to 3 years of English language exposure, this is in line with the stages of language development. Teachers also analyze ELA and Math data to discover the particular needs of the students. Teachers model and apply various research based practices which help ELL students extract meaning from reading so they are 2  more able to write successfully. Teachers use many various ENL Methodologies such as differentiation, home language support, visuals, small group instruction, buddy systems, scaffolding, color-coding information, technology, music, leveled questioning, and strong vocabulary support. Long sentences with difficult vocabulary, which are called "juicy sentences" are broken down using the “Deconstruct - Reconstruct Strategy”, mapping meaning to text. Students are taught to break down and understand these sentences. Word baggies, word walls, and personal word lists are kept for words which can be used for both comprehension and in vocabulary development for writing. Leveled word lists are also used for differentiation of instruction. Visuals are often used for lower level ELLs. Identifying language patterns and figurative expressions in writing samples gives students the tools to understand what they read and to develop their vocabulary to improve their writing. These strategies help students make the difficult transition from BICS to CALP and achieve greater success in their reading and writing. This should greatly address the disparity between the results of ELL students in the listening and speaking, and reading and writing modalities. Students on all grade levels are provided with the I-Ready computer based instructional program (for reading and math), which establishes each student’s strengths and weaknesses and provides individualized instruction accordingly. Students are assessed periodically and instruction is further revised. I-Ready also prints out data and reports which are useful for teachers to plan instruction for each student. ENL teachers provide classroom teachers with assistance in planning to meet the needs of ELL students and also turnkey strategies from workshops. Students receive test preparation for the ELA and NYSESLAT from the ENL and classroom teachers using teacher developed materials and the practice questions provided by New York State. We provide instruction on different levels reflecting the question types on the new and different bands of the NYSESLAT. We also refer to the English as a Second Language Arts Standards from Engage NY as guidance for what is expected of our ELL students. Language development is encouraged by the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher through collaborative planning and instruction. Together the teachers establish a low anxiety environment with comprehensible input, opportunities for the ELL learner to interact with peers and awareness of the stages of language acquisition. Scaffolding (but on grade level and rigorous) activities and differentiated instruction encourage students to achieve greater language proficiency through modeling language, providing high interest activities and pairing with a buddy to foster development and risk taking. Students are also grouped at tables with native speakers of English in order to provide maximum exposure to English modeled by their peers. A wide variety of assessment is used to assess development across the four modalities and to drive further instruction within the Zone of Proximal Development through social interaction and academic content-based activities. Instruction is developed to meet the specific needs of our ELL population. Students receive additional support through differentiated instruction, small group learning, individualized target learning, project based learning, as well as differentiated activities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At P.S. 58, we make every effort to ensure that a child's second language development is considered in all instructional decisions and make adjustments to our programs as needed. We do this by working on instructional teams – such as VERTICAL and HORIZONTAL TEAMS – set up by content area. We have an ENL Vertical Team that consists of ENL Teachers, Classroom Teachers with ELL students in their class, Foreign language Teachers and our Technology Teacher/Data Specialist. This team (as well as the other teams), collaborate with administration, and include all teachers who work with ELLs. We have discussions about approaches to target the most specific needs of our ELL students, while keeping language development as a part of all instructional decisions. Generally we try to focus on one area of need at a time and create a plan together. We try to work in 6-week cycles, adjusting accordingly. Our Vertical ENL Team share important data collected with other teams. As previously stated, The ENL team meets with administrators and co-teachers to formulate a list of action such as RTI, AIS, and possible Small Group Instruction and Individualized Targeted Instruction. We implement all strategies and modify based on student needs. All Horizontal and Vertical teams are provided with Professional Development on data collecting and data analysis and implementation in order to make adjustments to programs as needed. Classroom teachers use high-quality research-based instruction that is differentiated, challenging, and scaffolded for ELLs; they collect data, monitor ongoing progress, and work with colleagues in making instructional decisions based on the data. Teachers share their findings of student performance in the classroom, as well as their expertise in the classroom content and grade-level skills. We maximize student potential by sharing insights about the student’s home life, family background, and interests. Our ENL Specialists have expertise about language development, and how to use assessment tools and techniques, as well as how to use effective instructional practices for ELLs. As a result, we assure that the ENL specialists are included in the 3  instructional decision-making process. Because of this knowledge, their roles include: clarifying needs associated with second language acquisition, providing evidence for differences between learning differences and disabilities , putting data into a cultural context, and modeling instructional strategies for classroom teachers, as well as assisting with assessments. Finally, our special education teachers have expertise regarding how to support struggling students. As a result, they have critical roles to play in consulting, collaborating, and supporting ELL students in many different ways. Students on all grade levels are provided with the I-Ready computer based instructional program (for reading and math), which establishes each student’s strengths and weaknesses and provides individualized instruction accordingly. Students are assessed periodically and instruction is further revised. I-Ready also prints out worksheets and reports which are useful for teachers to plan instruction for each student. ENL teachers provide classroom teachers with assistance in planning to meet the needs of ELL students and also turnkey strategies from workshops. Students receive test preparation for the ELA and NYSESLAT from the ENL and classroom teachers using teacher developed materials and the practice questions provided by New York State. We provide instruction on different levels reflecting the question types on the new and different bands of the NYSESLAT. We also refer to the English as a Second Language Arts Standards from Engage NY as guidance for what is expected of our ELL students. Language development is encouraged by the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher through collaborative planning and instruction. Together the teachers establish a low anxiety environment with comprehensible input, opportunities for the ELL learner to interact with peers and awareness of the stages of language acquisition. Scaffolding activities, student-choice activities, and differentiated instruction encourage students to achieve greater language proficiency through modeling language, providing high interest activities and pairing with a buddy to foster development and risk taking. Students are also grouped at tables with native speakers of English in order to provide maximum exposure to English modeled by their peers. A wide variety of assessment is used to assess development across the four modalities and to drive further instruction within the Zone of Proximal Development through social interaction and academic content-based activities. Instruction is developed to meet the specific needs of our ELL population. Students receive additional support through differentiated instruction, as well as differentiated activities. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Freestanding ENL program. All instruction for ELLs in delivered based on mandated minutes as per CR Part 154.2. Instruction for ELLs has been aligned with the NYS Learning Standards, and delivery of ENL services is provided through a combination of standalone minutes and integrated minutes, We mostly use the push-in/co-teaching model, but also use pull-out ENL classes as necessary. All of this instruction is delivered in accordance with CR Part 154.2 (and now the new Alternative Pathways - 154-2.3) and all mandates are followed. ELLs are grouped into classes according to their grade level and travel together in a group. Most ELL classes have more than one proficiency level, although occasionally we form a class of all Expanding or Commanding students in order to maximize scheduling. Instruction is delivered using the Push-In/Co-Teaching model for the large majority of ELL students, especially students with Integrated minutes only. Some students with Standalone minutes may be pulled out so that two grade levels may be serviced if necessary. Instruction is given mainly through the Reader's and Writer's workshop model following the NYS Learning Standards and the curriculum. For school year 2018-2019, we will be incorporating and following the Alternative Pathways to Support Former English Language Learners for our Commanding ELLs, and will consider Option A, B, or C for certain students - but for 4  the most part, will try to keep Option D (90 minutes of integrated ENL) in order to support these students and address any specific instruction or interventions that they may need carefully. The classroom teacher and a licensed ENL teacher co-teach the mini lesson, using differentiated instruction and materials, and then students work in small groups where their areas of need are addressed. Within those groups, the ENL teacher focuses on ENL strategies and methodologies based on the level of the ELL students in the group. Integrated and Standalone minutes can be delivered within the classroom. A small number of Special Education students (15-20) that are in various self-contained or I.C.T classes who are eligible for ENL services, are pulled out into a small group in order to adhere to the students’ IEPs regarding group size, and in order to maximize scheduling and small group/individualized instruction. The I.C.T. students can be mainstreamed into a larger ELL class in order to receive services if necessary. They are given ENL instruction as part of the groups in the class during either Reader's or Writer's Workshop (or both). All service providers are licensed appropriately in order to provide and meet all mandates as necessary. We schedule our students correctly following all mandates and using the ELL Policy and Reference Guide (updated for 2018-2019) as guidance. At P.S. 58, we have "blocked" scheduling by grade for all students. This means that for example, all 3rd grade classes have Reader's Workshop at the same time each day. This helps with scheduling ENL services. All teachers on a grade share a common prep daily. This helps with lesson planning. We make every effort for the ENL teachers to have at least one common prep per week with teachers they work with in order to plan lessons collaboratively. ELL students are grouped by grade level and are mostly heterogeneously placed within the classroom. In some cases, to maximize scheduling, we group Expanding Level students together in one class, or Commanding Level students, by grade. Scores on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT tests are used to determine program eligibility for each student. Once program eligibility is determined, students are placed into designated classes on each grade level in order to facilitate the delivery of ENL services through the push-in model. Where there is a greater number of ELL students on a grade level, more than one class on each grade has been designated an ENL class. There are three licensed/certified teachers serving the classes with the push-in model, two classroom teachers that hold ENL certification that assist with meeting our mandates, and a minimal amount of pull-out instruction (only when necessary) for Entering/Emerging and some Special Education ELL students. Language development is encouraged by the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher through collaborative planning and instruction. Together the teachers establish a comfortable learning environment with comprehensible input, many opportunities for the ELL learner to interact with peers and a strong awareness of the stages of language acquisition. Scaffolded activities and differentiated instruction encourage students to achieve greater language proficiency through modeling language, providing high interest activities and pairing with a buddy to foster development and risk taking. Students are also grouped at tables with native speakers of English in order to provide maximum exposure to English modeled by their peers. A wide variety of assessment is used to assess development across the four modalities and to drive further instruction through social interaction and academic content-based activities. Academic Vocabulary is emphasized in all subject areas. Instruction is developed to meet the specific needs of our ELL population. Students receive additional support through small-group learning, individualized target learning, project-based learning, differentiated instruction, as well as differentiated and challenging activities. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our staff is organized appropriately through proper school scheduling by the administration here at P.S. 58. There is communication between the administration, classroom teachers, prep teachers, other service providers (such as speech, OT, PT, Guidance), and ENL teachers ensuring that all programs are given their mandated amount of time, and no conflicts are made. Generally, scheduling meetings are held at the start of each new school year where all information is collected ensuring 5  proper scheduling for all classes. This also ensures that classroom teachers and ENL teachers have the chance to coordinate both scheduling and instruction together. Teachers discuss scheduling to be sure that there are no last-minute conflicts during the time that ENL services are delivered. We assure that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program by carefully aligning the teacher schedules with the schedules of the teachers into whose classes the teachers are pushing. Scheduling conflicts are avoided through collaboration with related service providers who also work with the ELL student population (i.e. speech services, occupational therapy, etc.). Our program is a push-in/co-teach model aligned with New York State Standards with the required standalone minutes when necessary. Students enjoy maximum involvement in classroom activities as well as the support they need through ENL methodologies and differentiated instruction. Scaffolding, differentiation, and modeling are used on a regular basis. Where there is a greater number of ELL students on a grade level, more than one class on each grade has been designated for ENL. In the upper grades (3 through 6) one or two classes is designated for ENL services, depending on the numbers. There are five licensed/certified teachers serving the ELL population (Three teachers for push-in services, two teachers who are classroom teachers with ESL licenses). In the upcoming and current school year, all grades (K through 6) are serviced as per Part 154 requirements: • Entering students receive 180 minutes standalone ENL plus 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA for a total of 360 minutes. • Emerging students receive 90 minutes standalone ENL, 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes standalone or integrated ENL or any other content area. • Transitional students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction plus 90 minutes standalone or integrated ENL or any other content area. • Expanding Students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction. • Commanding students will follow the rules for the Alternative Pathways to Support English Language Learners and mainly receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or ENL/other content area instruction, which is Option D - or they may receive Option A (Small group learning), Option B (Individualized targeted learning), or Option C (Project based learning). a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Explicit ENL is delivered in the ENL program through collaborative planning, cooperation, and communication between the ENL and classroom teachers. ENL and classroom teachers of ELL students have one common prep period per week in order to compare data, share ideas and plan for instruction. Reading and writing instruction is provided using the workshop model. Language development is encouraged by the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher through this collaborative planning and instruction. Together the teachers establish a low anxiety, interactive environment with comprehensible input, multiple opportunities for the ELL learner to work in cooperative groups, to interact with peers and awareness of the stages of language acquisition. Small groups targeting similar needs and levels, and differentiation of instruction is used on a daily basis. Scaffolding activities encourage students to achieve greater language proficiency through modeling language, providing high interest activities and pairing with a buddy to foster language development and risk taking. A wide variety of assessment is used to assess development across the four modalities and to drive further instruction. Assessment and data drives instruction. Informal assessments include portfolios, teacher observation, and teacher/student conferencing/next steps. Formal assessments include NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, I-Ready for reading and Math, as well as State ELA and Math assessments where appropriate. Report cards are also looked at to gather data as well. Student needs are assessed and adjusted accordingly based on their performance. We engage our students in a wide variety of activities on a daily basis. We support our students with strong visuals, demonstrations, and shared experiences. Our ELL students listen, speak, read and write while striving for high standards and enhancing their success. In short, P.S. 58’s teachers target each student’s special need and work with these students on a regular basis in order to build academic and language proficiency. Instruction is developed to meet the specific needs of our ELL population. Students receive additional support through our differentiated instruction and small, leveled, flexible groups. There are several implications for the school’s LAP and instruction. New classes need to continue to be developed to address the specific needs of our students in each grade level, as described above. Professional development in ENL strategies/methodologies provided to staff on a regular basis. K and 1 will emphasize more Listening and Speaking. Grades 2, 3, 4, 5, & 6 will continue to emphasize Reading and Writing. Content-based, Academic Vocabulary (domain specific) is emphasized on all grade levels. We also have now incorporated an ENL Language Resource Center in each classroom which allows the ENL students center time and social interaction time. The centers contain word games, vocabulary games, activity cards, word magnets, picture dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, as well as other language-related items. 6  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. When ENL teachers push into a classroom during a content area lesson, the ENL teacher ensures that ELL students receive the same content area instruction through the use of ENL methodologies as described below. The content area topic, materials, books, supplies, many visuals, assistance of technology, and assignments are incorporated and adapted according to the students' levels of English language development (content-based). Bilingual dictionaries and many visuals are available, use of technology for native language support, bilingual glossaries with visuals and activities by subject area (such as ones provided on the DOE website) are also used by the students. Content area input is made comprehensible in a variety of ways, and students are allowed flexibility in producing a response to the material, thus demonstrating the students' comprehension of the lesson. Mini assessments and observations are done on a regular basis in order to help monitor progress and understanding of content area in ELL students. Reading and writing checklists are used and next steps are also given to students on a regular basis. At times for the Entering and/or Emerging students, we provide prompts, questions, feedback and checklists in the students’ native language. A DESCRIPTION OF NATIVE LANGUAGE SUPPORT FOR CONTENT AREA IN THE ENL PROGRAM: Bilingual picture dictionaries by content area, as well as bilingual glossaries are also offered to students for Science, Social Studies and Math to help newcomers with vocabulary comprehension. ENL teachers and classroom teachers also incorporate flexible grouping which provide ELL students the opportunity to work with all peers. Students can be paired up with a "buddy" who speaks their native language. The language of instruction is English however native language may be used occasionally if possible to explain certain things and directions to support the students socially through the use of Smart phones (Samsung) with the Google translate App in each ENL class. The content areas are delivered and made comprehensible in the program model through the use of technology (Smart Boards, Lap Tops, Smart phones, visuals, charts, real pictures, diagrams, “hands-on manipulatives”, posters, charts, real objects, flash cards, vocabulary, hands-on projects, and technology. Students are given hands-on experience in all content areas to help foster understanding. With the assistance of all teachers in our building (content-area, classroom, ENL, and any other service provider) we hold many events on a regular basis. We have monthly STEAM challenges, an annual Science Fair which involves all students working in groups to make a project, various multicultural festivals which introduce new vocabulary and cultural activities, walking trips in the community which address real life experiences and vocabulary for social studies, Social Studies projects which cover a variety of skills, Robotics, Young Inventors, STEAM Initiatives, Creative Art projects throughout the year, Cooking Carts and Science labs where students use math and measuring skills, community worker visits, and Author’s Apprentice day. We have also now added The Leader in Me Program here at P.S. 58 which is being rolled out through Professional Development and Action Teams. This includes ALL students in the school as part of this initiative. The language used within all content areas presently is English, but students may use bilingual glossaries and dictionaries as needed to help with comprehension of the subject area or activity. The content becomes more comprehensible for second language learners through all of these hands-on activities and visuals, with emphasis put on explaining vocabulary and following instructions delivered. Students experience maximum enjoyment and become part of a true hands-on learning experience. In this pleasant teaching and learning atmosphere, ELL students’ language is enriched on a daily basis. In order to meet the demands of the NYS Learning Standards, P.S. 58 has offered training and workshops to teachers at school on a regular basis. We also have purchased Reading, Writing, and Math programs that are aligned with the Standards (Ready Gen, Go Math, Ready NY LS) as well as purchased the I-Ready computerized program for reading and math with quarterly assessments and evaluation of student progress. Assessments are all aligned with the NYS Learning Standards. All ENL teachers have been provided with the NYS Standards for reference and assistance in knowing what is expected of our ELL students. "The purpose of the ESL Standards is to be a "spring board to content area standards; they provide the knowledge and skill development for high-level student achievement." ESL standards also "serve as a framework" for the NYSESLAT." Students are also grouped with native speakers of English in order to provide maximum exposure to English modeled by their peers. A wide variety of assessment is used to assess development across the four modalities and to drive further instruction within the Zone of Proximal Development through social interaction and academic content-based activities. Instruction is developed to meet the specific needs of our ELL population. Students receive additional support through flexible 7  grouping, small groups, partner work, differentiated instruction, as well as a wide variety of differentiated activities that challenge the students to use many skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? All new entrants whose HLIS responses indicate a home language of Spanish and who are newly identified as ELLs based on NYSITELL results are administered the Spanish LAB at the time of initial enrollment (or re-enrollment) during the 10-day testing window. The Spanish LAB is used to support schools in instructional planning in providing bilingual and English as a new language (ENL) services to these students. Spanish LAB results are not used to determine ELL status or service entitlement. Upon initial identification through the Home language Surveys and NYSITELL results, Spanish speakers are given the Spanish LAB as per mandates, usually within the first three days of entry – but always within the 10-day window. All speakers of other languages are provided with the opportunity to have translated tests where available, oral translators for NYS content area tests (not for the ELA as it is not permitted), and bilingual word-to word glossaries and well as home language support through technology (Smart phones, laptops, tablets) for Content Areas (Science, Math) where available. We utilize the assistance of approved translators for content area tests often. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students: P.S. 58 has developed a plan of differentiation for SIFE students should any arrive. We follow and refer to the “SIFE Resources” on the Intranet on the” Instructional and Compliance” page. There is an informational SIFE video on there for reference. Leveled libraries within the SIFE students’ classrooms will range from two levels below to one level above the SIFE student’s identified reading level. The guidance counselor will work with each student to generate a profile that will include emotional and affective factors which impact on learning. SIFE students will receive language appropriate testing in order to screen for learning disabilities. We invite parents to the school in order to learn about their cultural and family backgrounds. Students will be provided with differentiated instruction, which will include grouping by ability and need in order to focus on developing specific targeted skills in order to maximize gains. Self-contained classes will be formed, if justified, by need and numbers of students. Also the following: ● Assign the students “buddies” to help get them accustomed to the daily schedule and school environment. ● Activate prior knowledge; see where a good starting point for the students can be. Try to make connections to what they already know so teachers can create a starting point and the students will feel motivated and not frustrated. ● Use visuals, have students be “hands on” whenever possible; in other words, have them create their own glossaries, use manipulatives, have them do interactive technology assignments at the SMART board or on the laptops. When teaching new vocabulary, rephrasing, define within the context of the word, pause and use intonations when necessary. We always follow the “Identification of Students with Interrupted/Inconsistent Formal Education (SIFE)” from the ELL Policy and Reference Guide which states: “Students with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) are ELLs who have attended schools in the United States (the 50 States and the District of Columbia) for less than twelve months and who, upon initial enrollment in such schools are two or more years below grade level in literacy in their home language and/or two or more years below grade level in mathematics due to inconsistent or interrupted schooling prior to arrival in the United States.” We follow these SIFE Identification Guidelines: -Once SIFE status is determined, we enter this information into the BNDC screen in ATS. - We know that schools have 30 school days to determine ELL status; however, they have up to one year to change the SIFE status if necessary. -A SIFE will automatically be declassified as SIFE if the student attains transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT. 8  -We know that schools have 30 school days from initial enrollment to make an initial SIFE determination. Determining SIFE status begins at the time of the completion of the Home Language -We use the SIFE Identification Survey when the parent is asked to indicate prior schooling. We then follow all of the same steps to identify an ELL. If there are indications within the ELL Identification Process that a student has had an interruption or inconsistency in their formal schooling, we proceed with the SIFE Identification Process for students who are: Newly identified ELLs, and In grades 3 to 9, and At the beginner/entering or low Intermediate/emerging level of proficiency as indicated by the NYSITELL results. SIFE Identification Process: 1. We administer the SIFE oral interview questionnaire 2. For those students who have a home language of Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Haitian Creole, or Spanish, we use the identification process for NYSED Multilingual Literacy SIFE screener (MLS). We indicate in the DOE’s data collection systems (BNDC) no later than 30 days from initial enrollment. SIFE status is removed once the ELL scores at intermediate/transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT. For further information on SIFE, we go to http://intranet.nycboe.net/SpecialPopulations/ELL/Resources/ SIFE.htm. b. Newcomers: In order to meet the needs of newcomers (especially ELLs required to participate in the ELA tests after one year), P.S. 58Q has taken a series of actions. ELL students who are considered to be newcomers get differentiated instruction with a strong emphasis on methodologies and meaningful content-based vocabulary to increase BICS and CALP vocabulary usage, spelling, grammar, questioning and critical thinking skills. They also have access to ENL-based technology. This includes a wide range of online websites such as LEXIA, Starfall, Newsomatics, MYON and I-Ready just to name a few. These students are grouped together to allow for more individualized attention from the teachers. In addition, students are acclimated to life in the USA during expeditionary trips outside of the building and through developing social skills by speaking with teachers and peers. Both the classroom teacher and ENL teacher work collaboratively to incorporate as much language as possible into the classroom environment. Vocabulary, word walls and charts are used within every lesson. Students have vocabulary and grammar books and an Independent Skills Block (called the I-period) is planned for each class with a strong focus on the reading and writing skills that these ELL students will need for academic success. Technology is infused within lessons in order to assist students even further. Students work in small groups, especially during reading and writing to ensure their areas of need are met. ENL teachers provide extra assistance using graphic organizers and specialized differentiated worksheets to target specific skills. There is test prep given using Ready NY LS practice books to the upper grades by modeling and scaffolding testing strategies, as well as the correct way to answer questions. There is also a technology component to these LS practice books as well. All ELL students from grades 3 through 6 also have an opportunity to attend an after school program for ELA and Math prior to the standardized testing. In the two months prior to state testing, all students are involved in Test Prep Seminars which are given by our teachers within their classrooms. These seminars use visuals which help the ELL students greatly. At times, the ELL teachers may also pull small groups out of the classroom in order to teach or model a language skill of particular difficulty. There is also test prep practice offered within the extended day block for these students as well. P.S. 58’s Guidance Counselor is available to assist students having difficulty adjusting to the New York City educational system and the demands of participating in their new educational environment and culture. Parents are an essential ingredient in the success of all students, especially those who are new to an English language school system. In order to assist the parents with helping their children to succeed, P.S. 58 employs a full-time Parent Coordinator, Maria Agugliaro. Our parent coordinator holds parent orientation meetings and various workshops throughout the year where they may learn about their rights as parents: such as “Know Your Rights of Immigrant Parents”, the NYS Curriculum, State assessments, and how to help their children at home. These workshops provide parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a variety of family literacy and math workshops, so they can better assist in the education of their children at home. Parents will be coached in Math strategies and problem solving. Parents will also become familiar with the new NYS Learning Standards and the NYSESLAT. They will also become familiar with the ELA Performance Standards. Our staff will continuously work to involve parents further in their children’s academic success. All teachers continue to work to improve communication with the families of our ELL students. Flyers for all parent activities are posted on our “parent’s bulletin board” and sent home in several languages spoken in the community. Our Parent Coordinator also is our Language Access Coordinator 9  (LAC) and has communication with their office to support translation services for our parents. Teachers (including ENL Teachers) are always available for parent meetings at 2:30 on Tuesdays as well – with translation services always provided as needed. P.S.58Q uses the services of translators with the ability to prepare written correspondence to go out to the parents of the various language groups as well as to be available to translate the written responses from the parents. This goes a great way in empowering the parents of the school community to express themselves in their native tongue and foster a greater understanding between the school, teachers, and parents in order to ease the transition for their newly arrived student children. We brought parents and students of early registered Kindergarten students in before the start of school in September for evaluation and to discuss our programs with parents in a one-on-one environment. Parents were able to meet relevant staff and engage in discussion and ask any questions. We also always encourage parents to attend ELL parent conferences offered by the Department of Education. As previously stated, within the classroom, teachers will be employing many different ENL methodologies with all ELL students on various levels. For newly arrived students, teachers can pair the student with a buddy who speaks the student’s first language in order to provide assistance as needed. Teachers also provide any native language support available through books or technology. Extended day programs may become available on most grade levels. Newcomer groups could be formed to provide basic vocabulary, cultural and communication skills. Since the educational environment and individual situation for each student is different it is helpful to gather as much information as possible about the educational level of new students through formal and informal assessments to determine the educational level and to see if any new student could also be SIFE. Picture dictionaries, bilingual picture dictionaries, content-area bilingual glossaries, along with picture collections/cards provide basic vocabulary development for our newcomers. P.S.58Q has computers in all the classrooms and a variety of interactive language development programs available for different levels of English language proficiency, including the I-Ready program which is used every day. Students will also be receiving their own Surface tablets starting in school year 2018-2019. Many new books and supplies have been purchased for our classrooms’ ENL Language Resource Centers as well. Some of these items include: word games, vocabulary building games, magnetic letters and words, picture dictionaries, flash cards, bilingual glossaries, content-area dictionaries, hands-on activities, and activity folders to name a few. All books and games are grade level and age appropriate for our ENL students. c. & d. Developing and Long-Term ELLs: P.S. 58 provides all Developing ELLs and all Long-term ELLs with any and all interventions available (RTI, AIS, Small Group Learning, Individualized Targeted learning, Project-based learning, After School program). Our school continues to use a variety of instructional strategies to make concepts more comprehensible to students. We enhance language development using various ENL strategies such as pre-teaching to scaffold prior knowledge of a specific content area, modeling, the use of manipulative, differentiated graphic organizers, multi-leveled books on computer and CD, guided reading books in a variety of levels, vocabulary building opportunities, and reading comprehension. Small group remediation may also be used within the classroom during the school day. Instruction is geared toward skills and strategies that build on literacy skills, such as inferring, main idea, and cause and effect. I-Ready, our web-based program that addresses both literacy and math skills are used with the students during teacher-specified technology periods. The program provides level set activities aligned with the individual needs of each student. These lessons help students become more proficient at math and better readers. Lessons are based on the NYS Learning Standards. ELL students are invited to participate in all academic interventions available in our school, such as AIS, RTI, small group instruction, after school programs, and homework help. Our school continues to use a variety of instructional strategies to make concepts more comprehensible to students. ELL students are invited to participate in any academic interventions available in our school, in any subject area of need. Long-Term ELLs will have small group instruction with a minimum of 3 times per week in order to track their progress and differentiate their areas of need. They will participate in teacher-student conferences one extra time per week as well as have more instructional time using the computer. There will be also more support in the area of vocabulary in the way of word packets and students keeping their own personal dictionaries. e. Former ELLs (up to two years exiting): For Commanding students (Former ELLs) we will follow the Alternative Pathways to Support English Language Learners (CR Part 154-2.3) and our students will mainly receive the 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or ENL/other content area instruction, which is Option D. They may also receive Option A (Small group learning). Option B (Individualized targeted 0  learning), or Option C (Project based learning). Commanding students will have direct instruction activities to support language development and will be monitored to ensure academic success. They will also be offered the opportunity to participate in the Title III Program for ELLs. They will be invited to partake in any of the activities offered to ELLs. Monitoring of their progress and providing the monolingual teachers with support through professional development opportunities will also help these students as they continue learning English in a supportive environment. All former ELLs who achieved a level of proficiency within the last two years receive the same testing modifications as ELLs. Monitoring will be in the form of conference notes, benchmark assessments, content area assessments, report cards, and/or end-of-unit assessments. We ensure that all former ELLs (as well as ALL ELLs) receive all ELL testing accommodations for two years after they exit the program. ELL Testing Accommodations may include: “All ELLs and former ELLs for up to two years after testing out are eligible for ELL testing accommodations, in addition to any accommodations on their IEPs or 504 Plans, if applicable. Schools should determine which accommodations are most suitable and beneficial (will maximize the potential for achievement on all exams) for each ELL at the beginning of the school year. ELLs are entitled to using those accommodations for most assessments, including those that are teacher-made and State-mandated. ELLs are not entitled to ELL testing accommodations on the NYSESLAT. Schools may provide testing accommodations to ELLs, as needed, on all NYS ELA and content-area assessments (i.e., mathematics, science and social studies). Schools must make all necessary arrangements to make these accommodations available for ELLs who need them. A list of NYS-approved accommodations may be found in the School Administrator's Manual (SAM) for each respective test. Testing accommodations for ELL students on the NYS ELA and content-area assessments include the following: -Time extension (all exams): Schools may extend the test time for ELL students on NYS ELA and content-area assessments and on Regents examinations. Principals may use any reasonable extensions, such as "time and a half" (the required testing time plus half that amount), in accordance with their best judgment about the needs of the ELL students. Principals should consult with the student's classroom teacher in making these determinations. However, there are no time limits. -Separate location (all exams): Schools are encouraged to provide optimal testing environments and facilities for ELL students. NYS assessments may be administered to ELLs individually or in small groups in a separate location. -Bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries: ELLs may use bilingual glossaries when taking State examinations in all subjects except languages other than English exams (LOTE). The bilingual dictionaries and glossaries may provide only direct one-to-one translations of words. Bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries that provide definitions or explanations are not permitted. Bilingual glossaries in the content areas are available for downloading. -Simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. For state examinations for which SED provides written translations, ELLs may use both English and an alternative language edition of the test simultaneously. However, they should be instructed to record all of their responses in only one language. The alternative language edition used by the student should be so indicated on the student's answer sheet. -Oral translations for low incidence languages are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. Schools may provide ELL students with an oral translation of a state examination when there is no translated edition provided by SED. All translations must be oral, direct translations of the English editions. Written translations are not allowed. No clarifications or explanations may be provided. Translators should receive copies of the English edition of the tests one hour prior to administration. -Writing responses in the home language are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. ELL students making use of alternative language editions or of oral translations of state examinations may write their responses to the open-ended question in their home languages. Scoring the tests is the responsibility of the school.” Former ELLs participate in the ENL programs these students remain in the ENL classes as transitional students for up to two years. These students also receive continued support and communication with their ENL teacher. NYSESLAT scores are shared with the classroom teachers in order to enable them to tailor instruction to the needs of former ELL students. Staff development and ENL instructional strategies are shared with all teachers on each grade level, not just teachers with ELL students. This approach ensures that all teachers who have former ELL students in their classes are versed in the approaches which are successful with students from other than English language backgrounds. 1  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL students with disabilities whose IEP recommends ENL, bilingual speech services, a language paraprofessional, or bilingual instruction are provided with the appropriate instructional strategies and setting as per the IEP recommendations and goals. These students are part of small-group instruction on a daily basis which helps them to focus more easily. Because of their learning disabilities, these students require a small group. This small group setting allows these students more “talk-time” and “question-time.” This also allows the teachers to assess if the students are completing their “next steps” on a regular basis. Leveled classroom libraries, varied computer programs such as I-ready, Brain Pop, MYON, Newsomatics, Starfall, Lexia, WorldBook Online, which focus on all four modalities: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Students are also provided with all grade-level books for all content based subjects (Science, Social Studies, and Math). Many language-based activities are done within the school and within the classroom. All these activities, plus the differentiated instruction help to accelerate English language development. These students may also be given one-on-one instruction which assures that they are completing their tasks in class and helps to scaffold what they have trouble understanding. This one-on-one time also helps them achieve their IEP goals. Students may all be given ENL Baskets with their own individualized activities. SWD ELLs receive all services are per mandates: • Entering level SWD students receive 180 minutes standalone ENL plus 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA for a total of 360 minutes. • Emerging SWD students receive 90 minutes standalone ENL, 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes standalone or integrated ENL or any other content area. • Transitioning SWD students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction plus 90 minutes standalone or integrated ENL or any other content area. • Expanding SWD Students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction. • Commanding SWD students receive either 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or ENL/other content area instruction, or Option A, B, or C as stated in Alternative Pathways to Support Former ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 58Q has ELL students with special needs in self-contained 12:1:1 classes and in I.C.T (Integrated Co-teaching) settings. We are sure to make students succeed and feel welcome as well as ensure that all instruction is culturally relevant and connected to the students lives in some way. Flexible programming at our school ensures that ELL-SWDs experience maximum time spent with peers. All students participate in school- wide events together and common grades attend class trips together. All students heterogeneously participate in extra-curricular activities and perform in shows together, such as School Musical Performances, Olympic events, ceremonies, contests, STEAM challenges as well as any other school-wide event. ELL-SWDs receive the same mandated minutes of ENL services as students in the general education environment as follows: • Entering level students receive 180 minutes standalone ENL plus 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA for a total of 360 minutes. • Emerging students receive 90 minutes standalone ENL, 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes standalone or integrated ENL or any other content area. • Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA instruction plus 90 minutes standalone or integrated ENL or any other content area. • Expanding Students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction. • Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or ENL/other content area instruction, or Option A, B, or C as stated in Alternative Pathways to Support Former ELLs.. Currently, ELL students with special needs are serviced through a combination of the push-in and pull-out model. Programs are created in order to ensure time (and group size) mandates are met. In this case, the group size would not exceed 12 students in order to fulfill the mandates of the student’s IEP. Instruction is developed pertaining to the matters of grouping, teaching methodology, testing accommodations and assessment, through the information provided on the student’s IEP. As said previously, flexible programming at our school ensures that ELL-SWDs experience maximum time spent with peers. All 2  students participate in school wide events together, common grades attend class trips together, and school wide initiatives such as STEAM Workshop also ensure all students' equal participation. General Ed ELL students and ELL-SWDs also work on projects together and participate in Project-Based activities on a regular basis. All students heterogeneously participate in extra-curricular activities and perform in shows together, such as winter and spring School Performances. Many hands-on learning experiences are also available such as STEAM Challenges, Young Inventors and Robotics. ELL students who are classified as Special Education or have been referred to the CSE are provided with small group instruction within their classroom setting. These small groups allow these students to focus, as well as have more attention. These groups also keep them more engaged in the strategy being worked on, as they can share their ideas and ask questions more often. The students can conference on a similar skill within that small group and are given more time to participate. MYON, Brain Pop ESL, I-Ready Program, Ready Gen reading and writing program are used in the ELA content areas as described. In addition to the ENL teachers, there are RTI teachers who work with Special Education and referred ELL students as needed. These students are serviced in very small groups and are grouped according to level. All scheduling contains the flexibility to ensure the diverse needs are met for all ELL-SWDs. As previously stated, all students participate in all activities, interventions, and special events here at P.S. 58. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. P.S. 58’s targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math and other Core Content areas are as follows: We provide Response to Intervention Services (RTI) in cycles with teacher recommendation and data. Students complete 2 cycles of RTI before a next step is taken. Students in need are also given Academic Intervention Services (AIS) services during the “I-Period” by a qualified classroom teacher. They are pulled out and given AIS or RTI in small groups in a separate room, targeting their area of need. This is scheduled into the regular school day. Some students are provided with SETTS or At-Risk Services by our IEP Teacher. Students who are At-Risk for Academic, Speech, or Guidance Counseling services are provided At Risk services as needed by our IEP Teacher, Speech Pathologists and/or our Guidance Counselor. Any students in need of a referral process are given one and all testing is done as needed. All ELL sub-groups are targeted on an as-needed and equal basis. Entering and Emerging students however sometimes receive support in their native languages through the use of a paraprofessional or a teacher who speaks their language. The languages the programs are offered in are English and Spanish (especially for At-Risk Speech services as we have a Bilingual Speech pathologist). P.S. 58Q employs many forms of intervention for students. P.S. 58Q offers Response to Intervention (RTI Services) to students in need. This service is provided by licensed Special Education teachers on various grade levels. Our teachers offer intervention services to these children throughout the year, focusing on each child’s specific area of need. The services are provided in the RTI Room. This is usually done throughout the school day in very small groups. There is also an after-school test prep program prior to the NYS exams. This may include one on one tutoring in various content areas, including Math and ELA. Intervention Services for ELLs throughout the school year focus on each ELL’s specific areas of strengths and weaknesses. The information for targeting the student’s strengths and weaknesses are found on state ELA scores, state math scores, the NYSYSLAT, and in class, ongoing pre and post assessments. Teachers keep individual student portfolios with unit test scores, final projects, samples of student work as well as any other form of intervention that the student has participated in. This includes communication with parents and any other staff member who is involved in the students’ academic success. This is accomplished, in part, during weekly Teacher Team Meetings. Teams are comprised of teachers who teach the same grade and subject. During these meetings student work is reviewed, analyzed and evaluated. This enables teachers to share scaffolds, best practices, and plan for effective ways to address students’ individual strengths, weaknesses and educational needs. ENL teachers also participate in these meetings to address language-related instructional issues as well as issues that relate to the individual needs of students receiving ENL instruction, such as classroom testing and various ways to scaffold and differentiate instruction. During these meetings recommendations are made for SETTS and other related services for ELLs with IEPs. These interventions include: o Small Group Instruction or Conferencing/Individualized Targeted Learning o Individual Conferencing 3  o Scaffolded Instruction o Facilitation of extended test times during classes o After School Title III programs o Homework Help - MASPETH TOWN HALL AFTER SCHOOL Cooperative learning using technology is implemented throughout the school for ELL students. This includes the software programs of I-Ready, MYON, and Brain Pop or Brain Pop ESL. Smart Boards and Laptops (classroom computer carts) are accessible in content area classrooms to assist instruction and provide interactive learning for ELLs. For all content areas: ELA, Science, Social Studies and Math, P.S. 58’s teachers continue to assess students on a regular basis, both formally and informally. Teachers keep updated data portfolios with test scores, samples of student work, as well as any other form of intervention that takes place. Students are provided with "Next Steps" which helps them focus more closely and individually on the areas of need. Teachers also share good communication with parents and any staff member who is involved in the students’ academic success. Our ELL students who have not met the performance standard in ELA, specifically reading, participate in the Reader’s Workshop Model, and participate in small-group instruction whenever possible. They receive instruction from both their classroom and their ENL teacher. The students are grouped by reading level or NYSESLAT level and have an opportunity to participate more while in these reading groups. Within these groups, they use books on their specific level to work on and understand certain skills. They can ask more questions, they can find the answers in the text more often, and they can de-code unfamiliar vocabulary words on a more regular basis. This small-group time also allows the teachers to assess on a more regular basis what is needed to move the student forward. Students may also receive one-on-one instruction in certain cases. This may be reserved for students who are very below reading level even after 3 years. It may also be for students who have trouble focusing on what they read or answering questions. They are engaged in shared reading, guided reading, independent reading, questioning, accountable talk as well as developing language experiences. Instruction is geared toward skills and strategies which will build literacy, such as inferring, main idea, and cause and effect. We enhance reading development using various ENL strategies such as scaffolding, vocabulary building, and reading comprehension. ELL students who have not met the performance standard in ELA, specifically writing, are given instruction by both the classroom and ENL teacher using the Writer’s Workshop model. These students are placed in small writing groups and are grouped by similar needs. For example, if three students continue to struggle with writing topic sentences, then those students would work together with a teacher in that small group to attack that skill. The students would have extra opportunities to participate and share their ideas about that skill. The teacher is also able to assess the next skill that needs to be worked on while in those smaller groups. In certain circumstances, a teacher may work on writing one-on-one with a student who is still struggling with basic writing mechanics such as sentence structure or organization of writing. All students are involved in shared writing, modeled writing, independent writing and interactive writing. These students receive extra instructional minutes whenever possible. During these minutes, the students have the opportunity for extra writing conferences and editing. Writing portfolios, "Next Step" Tips, Conferencing Labels, Smart Board technology, NYSESLAT test prep (writing portion) and other intervention programs may also be used. Informal assessments include benchmark writing, running records, portfolios, teacher observation, and teacher/student conferencing. Conferencing is often delivered on a one-on-one basis, or in a very small group based on similar needs. Formal assessments include NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Ready Gen, and other standardized tests. Our ELL students who require targeted intervention in Science or Social Studies participate in whole-class instruction with differentiation, small-group instruction, and cooperative learning groups whenever possible. The students work in small groups with the assistance of one content area Science teacher, the ENL teachers, and the classroom teachers (for Social Studies). Students have an opportunity to participate more while in these cooperative groups. They can ask more questions, and they are exposed to many content area vocabulary words on a more regular basis. This small-group time also allows the teachers to assess on a more regular basis what is needed to move the student forward. Students may also receive one-on-one instruction in certain cases. ELL teachers, as well as all teachers, enhance content area development using various ENL strategies such as scaffolding, and vocabulary building with the use of many visuals and hands-on projects. Students are given a wide variety of books within that content area and ELL students receive extra opportunities to participate in school-wide initiatives involving Science or Social Studies (e.g. Science Fair, Cultural Events, Class trips, etc). In Science, students are involved in many hands-on projects which makes the information more comprehensible to them. The STEAM teachers, ELL teachers, and classroom teachers use many charts and diagrams to further target all students, especially the ones that need extra or differentiated instruction. In Social Studies, the use of bright and colorful books, as well as the use of maps, globes, and computer technology 4  also further targets students and their varied needs. Emphasis is placed on making vocabulary more comprehensible by breaking down meanings for students and using this vocabulary in real-life conversations and experiences. Science and Social Studies Word Walls are also displayed in every classroom to emphasize and reinforce the understanding of content. ELL students who are in need of targeted intervention in Math, or have not met the performance standard in Math, are given differentiated instruction on a daily basis. These students participate in whole-class instruction and are then able to work in guided math groups based on their specific needs. Students are involved in math games, the use of many math manipulatives (pattern blocks, rulers, flash cards, dice, protractors, geometric shapes, etc.), the Math Problem of the Day, as well as instruction using small math groups using the Smart Board for a hands-on experience. Math Word Walls and Math Centers are displayed in every room. These Word Walls and Centers are used interactively (e.g. students may see pictures or diagrams to help them visualize the math concept). For example, if three students continue to struggle with word problems, then those students would work together with a teacher in that small group to attack that skill. The students would have extra opportunities to participate and share their strategies in using that skill. The teacher is also able to assess the next skill that needs to be worked on while in those smaller groups. In certain circumstances, a teacher may work on math one-on-one with a student. Assessments include unit tests, NYS Math exam, math journals, teacher observation, and teacher/student conferencing. Conferencing is often delivered on a one-on-one basis, or in a very small group based on similar needs. Students in grades 3 through 6 are also invited to an after-school test prep program for Math prior to the NYS Math standardized test. Go Math program is being used this school year. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The program that may be considered for the upcoming school year (depending on Title III budget) is an After-School program to target ELLs who have difficulty obtaining proficiency on the Reading or Writing portion of the NYSESLAT. This program will focus on leveled vocabulary, scaffolding instruction in both reading and writing using various levels of questioning, cultural texts, picture prompts to build vocabulary and ask and answer questions, discussion groups, and word games. Hands on activities for projects may also be incorporated. ELL students will also be offered the opportunity to participate in our after-school program that targets reading, writing and mathematics instruction based on the curriculum in the two months prior to the state exams. This program will break things down for ELLs through the use of extra modeling, strong vocabulary support, scaffolding, small group instruction, increased wait time for answering questions, visuals, and technology support. An improvement we are trying to make is to use even more data-driven instruction than ever before. We will do this by analyzing all four modalities of the NYSESLAT, as well as the scores of the State ELA, Math, and Science exam. In the past we also provided a program to provide English language instruction for the parents of ELL students, which we may start again. This program was successful as many parents attended and were interested. We also provide an after school program for Homework Help given through Maspeth Town Hall which we will continue. The trends found based on data is that our ELL students need more support in the area of vocabulary - especially content based vocabulary in all subject areas, which we try to put a very strong focus on as a school. We also see a need for more practice with both asking and answering questions. The trends have also shown that comprehension has been improving with this extra vocabulary support being given in all subject areas. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELL students are invited to participate in any after-school programs offered, such as after-school Test Prep, and Homework help from Maspeth Town Hall. Invitations and permission slips to all school events and programs are sent home in students' home folders with tear off slips and information for parents. The forms are sent home in a variety of languages if available. Our Parent Coordinator often helps with the distribution and connection to parents. She is also available to all parents for questions and answers. ELL students are included in every school program, including STEAM, Art, Dance, Computer Technology, Music, and Italian (foreign language). This is ensured by every class being scheduled equally on the school’s prep schedule. Every class also has the opportunity to participate in every school activity and special event equally. Some of these activities include a Science Fair, Harvest Festival, Halloween Parade, School of Heroes Vocabulary Parade, Spelling Bees, Physical Challenges, STEAM Challenges, Spirit Day, Leader in Me Pinning Ceremony, 5  Gingerbread Day, Pancake Day, Pi Day, Carnival, Author's Apprentice Day, Italian Festival, Multicultural Dance and Food Festival, and Poem in a Pocket Day, to name just a few. Our ELLs, and ALL our students are a regular part of the school and all students are 100% equally invited and included in everything. Students on all grade levels are provided with computer based instructional programs (I-Ready, MYON, ESL Brain Pop) by our ENL licensed computer teacher plus four mobile computer carts. These computer based programs are offered in both the computer lab and the two multi-media labs. They are also available on the classroom laptops and on all of the desktops in each classroom. Headphones are provided for each student so they may use the program properly and without distraction. These programs establish each student’s strengths and weaknesses and provide individualized instruction accordingly. Students are assessed periodically and instruction is further revised. In the school year 2019-2019 students will have their own Surface Tablets for use as well. We also print out usage data and reports, worksheets and extra reports which are useful for teachers to plan instruction for each student. If any ELL student should require Speech, SETTS, AIS, RTI, At-Risk services, Special Education services, Occupational Therapy or Physical Therapy, the service is offered and provided to them as required. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ESL students at P.S. 58Q participate in interactive computer-based instructional programs using both the Smart Boards, Desktop computers, and Laptop computers in their classrooms, as well as brand-new touch screen desktop computers. Students have access to Smart Phones for educational apps, laptops on mobile carts, two technology labs, and Surface tablets as needed. The can work on I-Ready activities, a typing program, NEWSOMATICS (current events), MYON, Study Island, Brain Pop, WorldBook Online, as well as research information and view informational videos on the Internet. Students are also participation in the I-Ready reading and math program and assessments online. These programs perform diagnostic assessments of the students’ academic levels and designs individualized instruction to meet the needs of each student. Student progress is tracked and the program adjusts instruction according to student strengths and weaknesses. Our data specialist also prints out worksheets and reports which are useful for teachers to plan instruction for each student. Reports reflect student progress and areas requiring continued focus. As previously stated, headphones are provided for each student to use while on computers within their classroom. Our principal purchased Everyday Fun Learning Kits (4 levels) for our ELL students to use in small groups in their classroom. These kits consist of leveled books, audio pens that read to the students, headphones, and activity cards. The books have vocabulary pages, questions for comprehension, and colored visuals to accompany the stories. As the children hold the audio pens over the words, the book reads aloud to the child. This helps with listening skills, reading skills, comprehension skills, and pronunciation (speaking) skills. The kits also offer support in Spanish. Our principal has also purchased Samsung Smart phones (for ELLs to use for apps and some social communications - wants and needs), and many materials for our new ENL LANGUAGE RESOURCE CENTERS available in each ENL class. Some of the materials in these centers include language games, content-based bilingual picture dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, flash cards, magnetic words and letters, puzzles, and cooperative activities. P.S. 58Q has also purchased Ready New York State Learning Standards series of test prep books. These books provide specific instruction, by grade-level, designed to prepare students for the ELA (and Math) exam. These books include lessons geared toward listening, reading and writing. By previewing with students the structure and type of questions on the ELA we will ensure that students are well prepared for the test. Each of the lessons contain an ENL component and an ENL focus point based on the ELL learning standards. ENL teachers and classroom teachers can use these activities for instruction targeting ELLs. Vocabulary is widely targeted as well as some grammar. As previously stated, ELL students are provided with an ENL Resource Centers in each classroom that contains a wide variety of vocabulary and content-based books, activities, games, and materials. These materials all increase language and support vocabulary building, writing, and reading skills. As previously stated, Ready NYS ELA and Math Learning Standard books are purchased and provided to every student in grades 3 through 6. Newer ELL students are given bilingual dictionaries and glossaries to assist them in the content areas. For students who need help in writing, we provide instruction following the Writer’s Workshop model using the NYS Learning Standards, and technology such as the Smart Board, desktop computers, Lap Tops, and Surface tablets whenever possible. Students are involved in modeled writing and interactive writing while using the Smart Board in conjunction with the teacher. This year we will follow the writing program from Ready Gen, which has ENL support built into the program. ELL students have 6  the visuals of the Smart Board to help them understand topics and concepts further. Small group instruction is used with the Smart Board or Lap top computers which allow the students more opportunity to interact in the writing process and to be a part of more modeled writing. It also provides focus and interest to struggling students. These students may also receive extra instructional minutes whenever possible, as previously stated. During these minutes, the students have the opportunity for extra writing conferences to target areas that those students continue to struggle with (such as writing mechanics and editing). The Smart Board has also been a great tool to target writing mechanics. Students are also given individual "Next Steps" to help guide them with what they need to work on. NYSESLAT test prep(writing portion) and various intervention programs may also be used during our I-periods. Informal assessments include running records, portfolios, teacher observation, and teacher/student conferencing. Formal assessments include NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, I-Ready, MYON, Ready Gen unit tests, and other Standardized tests such as Math, ELA and Science. In reading, ELL’s participate in the Reader’s Workshop using technology such as the Smart Board, laptops, desktops, and tablets whenever possible. Google Docs is used for writing, editing and feedback/next steps from teachers. It is also used for data. Students are involved in modeled reading and interactive reading while using the Smart Board in conjunction with the teacher. ELL students have the visuals of the Smart Board to help them understand topics and concepts further. Small group instruction is used with the Smart Board which allows the students more opportunity to interact in the reading process. It also provides focus and interest to struggling students. The students are engaged in shared reading, guided reading, independent reading, accountable talk as well as developing language experiences. Instruction is geared toward skills and strategies which will build literacy, such as inferring, main idea, and cause and effect. We enhance reading development using various ENL strategies such as scaffolding, vocabulary building, and reading comprehension. Small group remediation may also be used. NYSESLAT test prep (reading portion), or Open Court Phonics (for at risk) can be used as well. P.S.58Q uses the NYS Learning Standards and Reader’s and Writer’s workshop model using genuine literature and trade books. P.S. 58 has purchased both the Ready Gen Series for reading and writing (approved by NYC for LS) and the reading program. Teacher generated materials such as charts and graphs provide a print rich classroom environment. Leveled classroom libraries help all students, as well as books and literature available on MYON, STARFALL, iReady and NEWSOMATICS. The mini-lesson focus points provide feedback, introduce elements and address student needs. In writer’s workshop, students use journals, source books, note taking charts and post-it notes for note-taking and generating researched based reports. Students produce writing pieces and edit their stories through the writing process. Touchstone texts are read over again to build and reinforce vocabulary. Interactive writing projects foster creativity and skills. To teach and support basic skills, Open Court Phonics and the Wilson intervention program for At-Risk (RTI) ELL students are used when applicable. We always infuse technology for extra support. Go-Math (approved by NYC) is used daily in grades K-6. Math manipulatives are used on a regular basis as well. NYC Ready Math CCLS books are also purchased and used for all students, including ELLs. In conclusion, P.S. 58 provides all students with tailor-leveled resource materials. These materials touch upon pre-reading skills, phonemic awareness, activation of prior knowledge and content-based instruction used within the classroom. All materials are age and grade appropriate and contain activities to support all students as needed. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is provided through the ENL program model through the use of many instructional materials. These materials include: content-based bilingual books (Oxford Content Based Readers - Math Everyday), various bilingual dictionaries/glossaries (Oxford Bilingual Dictionaries in all four levels, Oxford Content Learning for Kids, Learning Resources Science and Math Content Picture Dictionaries), bilingual picture dictionaries and posters (Scholastic My First Picture Dictionary in Chinese - purchased from China Sprout.com), as well as ENL centers which contain instructional materials such as bilingual flash cards with vocabulary support, and bilingual writing prompts for newcomers who know how to write in their home language. We also have bilingual reading kits (Everyday Fun Learning Kits, as previously discussed) (there are headphones inside, automatic "pens" which read to the students in English, Spanish, or Chinese, as well as a variety of books to chose from with activities in the back) which contain both fiction and non fiction texts that offer students Chinese or Spanish support. There are also websites offered through all our computers here at P.S. 58. Students are also able to use the bilingual support service (Google Translate if they choose) on the any computer program available, which helps to clarify teacher directions and gives vocabulary to the students in both English and in their home language (as much as possible). 7  Other instructional materials are found in our school library which has a variety of bilingual books that students can borrow and read. There is a whole bookcase devoted to these books and we are ordering the Harry Potter books in other languages. Some books are also available on CD for listening centers. We also provide the students with the bilingual word to word glossaries within all different content areas so they may use it in class and while taking an exam. Translated tests and oral translators are offered to students for the New York State content area exams. New students are also paired up with a buddy that speaks their home language to give them social support, which in turn makes them more comfortable academically. We have now given Samsung Smart Phones to classroom teachers of ELLs that contain various apps for usage within the classroom with ELLs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels appropriately. All materials used are purchased in a variety of levels so that we may tailor them to the students' ages and grade levels. Anything that is available to be purchased by specific grade level is done so. We ensure this by purchasing and utilizing the proper materials within all content areas. We align all materials purchased with the curriculum and grade that they students are in. We also look at age appropriate topics and vocabulary when purchasing and using materials. The materials are also always culturally appropriate. We try our best to have a strong support system for all students in the form of all school personnel and a great connection with parents and their home traditions. We love to learn what the students are interested in and align all learning and cultural activities to the students ages and grades, as well as their interests. All I-Ready and other computer assessments (and activities) are set up by grade level. All books purchased and provided are appropriate for all students' age levels. The students are able to connect to their cultures and they are relevant. When a student participates in any program, all activities are age and grade-level appropriate. All library books used in the classroom for all subject areas are grade appropriate for all ELL students or usage within the classroom with ELLs. We also have both a bilingual speech pathologist and a bilingual school psychologist that assists with ensuring that the required services are age and grade appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 58 shares our school building with P. 9, District 75. Mainly two separate resources are used in the two schools. However we do have P. 9 as part of the LEADER IN ME program and work collaboratively to have a welcoming school culture and include all students in school activities and events. P. 9 participates in many cultural events and we are going to continue to work together in the future. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Upon registration and in the later part of the summer, eligible ELLs are given an informal reading/writing assessment and friendly interview by a licensed teacher prior to school beginning. In September, before the start of school, parents of pre-registered Kindergarten children were invited to bring in their children for ELL assessment and to have a brief one-on-one question answer session with the ESL staff. The early assessment of student skills gives us information about the students’ abilities and appropriate placement needs. We also use this to determine possible programs for the child in the upcoming school year. P.S. 58 has a full-time Parent Coordinator who organizes informative opportunities for parents. She invites parents to all school activities and communicates in a variety of translated languages via assistance from the DOE Translation Unit. Flyers, posters and letters are shared in a variety of languages. Our school Guidance Counselor also takes a very active role in all yearly activities and is available for counseling and support for all new ELLs at the beginning and throughout the school year. She offers many student help groups that students are welcome to join if they need to. On such group is a group for students who are separated from their parent for any reason. She also organizes a puppet program and some other helpful activities for the students. 8  Newly enrolled students also receive a calendar with pictures that counts off the days until school begins. This calendar contains information for both the student and the parent. Activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year include an orientation to show the students around the school as well as placing the students with a buddy to help them acclimate to the new school environment. If the student speaks little or no English, we try to pair them up with a student who speaks their language. We continue to provide all students with strong visuals for more support and understanding. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language elective that is offered to ELL students is Italian. All students from grades K through 6 get at least one period of Italian per week. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable. Our school does not currently have a dual language program, but we are considering one for the future. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Describe the professional development plan for all personnel of ELLs at the school. P.S. 58 holds and also participates in professional staff development workshops geared toward teachers and paraprofessionals with ELL students in their classes. Staff developments may be conducted by ENL teachers, as well as Department of Education staff developers and administrative staff. Workshop topics specifically geared toward the ENL program may include: Welcome to a New Year with ELLs, Helpful Suggestions to the Classroom Teacher with ELL’s, Introduction to the ELL Program, ELL Strategies to Use in Your Classroom, Determining ENL Eligibility, The NYSESLAT, Incorporating High-Level Vocabulary for ELLs, and Finding More Information about ENL. Staff also participates in workshops on the NYS Curriculum and Standards, as well as technology based workshops for iReady and Leader in Me. These workshops also turn-key valuable information from other sources, such as “Integrated Curriculum and Instruction” focusing on research. ENL teachers participate in a wide variety of staff development offered at our school and well as around New York City. Some other workshops around the city that ENL Teachers participate in are: The EDAT refresher, LAC Training with the Language Translation Unit, LAP training with Yazmin Torres, and Nuts and Bolts for the ENL Program just to name a few. We also have participated in the ELL Liaison Meetings with Giuvela Leisengang to keep up-to-date with ELL compliance as well as to support literacy development for ELLs. We also participate in our own online PDs by using the resources available on the NYC DOE website which offers many online resources and online PD and slideshows. We constantly review and use the ELL Policy and Reference Guide as a resource and as PD for ourselves. We follow all the updated versions. Non-Pedagogic staff, such as our Pupil Accounting Secretary also participates in PD regarding Home Language Surveys and following intake procedures for new ENL students. She works collaboratively with the ENL Team here at P.S 58 ensuring that all steps are followed regarding admitting new and transfer ELLs. We constantly update each other on any new information that is given at any PDs involving ELLs that pertains to her. All teachers, including ENL teachers, will participate in other workshops such as: technology workshops (including SmartBoard and SmartTable), LEADER IN ME Training, Leader in Me Training, I-Ready Training, Vocabulary Development with ELLs, Respect For All (Anti-Bullying), FEMA Online training, Child Abuse Workshop, and NYS Learning Standards for Math and ELA. Personnel involved in receiving professional development are: General Education Classroom Teachers, Special Education 9  Classroom Teachers, Content Area Teachers (STEAM, Science, Art, Italian, Computer Technology, and Music), ENL Teachers, Assistant Principals, Paraprofessionals, Guidance Counselor, Psychologists, Speech Therapists, O/T, P/T, Secretaries, and our Parent Coordinator, just to name a few. We have four Speech and Language Therapists (one is bilingual Spanish), as well as two Occupational Therapists and two Physical Therapists (one is bilingual Polish) who also provide assistance and staff development in a variety of strategies and areas. There are workshops offered for all staff in different content areas. For example, Response to Intervention, The Referral Process, Strategies to Help At-Risk Students, Strategies in Math and ELA, as well as Science and Social Studies Workshops as needed. There is staff development for all teachers on staff on Election Day, Brooklyn Queens Day, after school, during the day - common preps, as well as outside workshops offered through the DOE and the UFT. This year we plan to implement professional development for all teachers to address more ENL strategies and methodologies. We will also focus on more technology-based workshops. We will work with all our specialists, as well as our administration to provide additional support for all members of our staff. 2. What PD is offered to teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Standards? In order to meet the demands of the NYS Learning Standards, P.S. 58 has offered (and has been offered) training and professional development workshops to all teachers/staff members at our school on a regular basis (usually we have PD once a month on the teachers' common preps). Staff members have both held workshops to all teachers at P.S. 58, including the teachers of ELLs, offering training and information on the Standards. Staff members and assistant principals will continue to hold workshops on the Standards this year as well. Staff members participate in classroom inter-visitations on a regular basis. We will also continue to have Model Teachers in the upcoming 2018-19 school year. These teachers will provide ongoing modeling of lessons and PD for our staff. We also have purchased Reading, Writing, and Math programs that are aligned with the Standards (Ready Gen, Go Math, Expeditionary) as well as purchased I-Ready for assessments and evaluation of student progress (this includes individualized activities). Our assessments are all aligned with the NYS Learning Standards. Webinars and training are also offered through I-Ready as well. All teachers have access to the NYS Learning Standards in both ELA and Math. In addition, all ENL teachers have been provided with a copy of the Standards for reference and assistance in knowing what is expected of our ELL students. "The purpose of the ESL Standards is to be a "spring board to content area standards; they provide the knowledge and skill development for high-level student achievement." ESL standards also "serve as a framework" for the NYSESLAT. The staff is provided with different aspects of support to assist ELLs as they transition from elementary to middle school. The Guidance Counselor is a support system and “go-to” person for all staff members and parents. She is available for questions and discussions on a regular basis during this transition time for all parents and students, Special Ed and ELL included. Our Guidance Counselor is experienced and well-versed in this transition process as she handles it every year. She communicates with the new middle schools involved and ensures all information is relayed and received between schools. Our staff is provided with grade conferences where they can complete record cards and articulation for the students moving to middle school together. ENL teachers assist with the articulation for these students as well. Our Parent Coordinator explains all options to the staff, students, and parents. She also provides information as needed and assists the staff with any questions they may have. All information is offered in various languages whenever available. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school provides and meets professional development requirements for all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all English as a New Language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching. As stated previously, there is ongoing ENL training for all staff members here at P.S. 58. This training meets or exceeds the minimum hours required. Staff may be given various workshops on the designated Professional Development days at the start 0  of the school year, Election Day and on designated staff development days that include many varying topics that would help them with their ELL students. Workshop topics may include: NYS Curriculum, Vocabulary Development for ELLs, Cultural Diversity, Tips for the Newcomers, Helpful Suggestions to the Classroom Teacher with ELL’s, Introduction to the ELL Program, ENL Strategies to Use in Your Classroom, Determining Eligibility for ELLs, The NYSESLAT, and Finding More Information. Staff members also receive training during Monday and Tuesday afternoons, as well as during the school day in the form of “inter-visitations”, “Lunch and Learns”, Mentoring, Model Teacher Monday Visitations (which include ELL classes), and PD during common preps. In the past, as well as currently, various staff members have attended various workshops offered by the (DELLS) Office of English Language Learners. We will continue to check the OELL website and sign up for workshops that we feel will be helpful. Staff members continue to attend workshops offered by the UFT as well (CTLE hours are offered and many of these PDs are geared toward ENL). We can find these PDs in the UFT newspaper, on the app, online, and trough e-mails from our UFT rep. In addition, staff developers visit our school and offer a variety of workshops that involve many staff members, including ENL teachers. As previously stated, ENL teachers will continue to participate in a wide variety of staff development offered at our school and well as around New York City. Some other workshops around the city that ENL Teachers participate in are: The EDAT refresher, LAC Training with the Language Translation Unit, LAP training with Yazmin Torres, and Nuts and Bolts for the ENL Program just to name a few. We also participate in our own online PD by using the resources available on the NYC DOE website which offers many online resources and online PD and slideshows. We constantly review and use the ELL Policy and Reference Guide as a resource and as PD for ourselves. Records of all workshops are maintained in the form of sign-in sheets, agendas, CTLE hours, and certificates of attendance given to the teachers upon request. the administration keeps all copies of attendance to all PDs on file as we have them. We continuously refer to the ELL POLICY AND REFERNCE GUIDE, PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT section for more information. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL department in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator, Administrators, and Language Proficiency Team (LPT) will work together to provide provisions for interpretations and translations, both oral and written, of all pertinent information. Individual (and at times small group meetings) will be held to discuss the goals and progress of ELL students with parents. ENL teachers will utilize Tuesday afternoons every week, Team Teacher Meetings, IEP meetings, after school hours and before school (if needed) to contact and meet with parents. We also may conduct phone conferences and meetings as well as communicate through e-mail and written letters and progress reports. Records of these meetings are kept in a log by individual teachers. We each have a blue Parent Connection Folder that includes date, time, and information discussed. We also maintain parent tear-offs on certain invitations (parents check off “I will attend” or “I will not attend” and sign), sign-in sheets and agendas if we plan a more formal parent workshop. Translators (and translated materials) will be used as necessary and as often as possible. We utilize all assistance from the Language Translation Unit. Other staff member that may join us for parent meetings include the administrators, classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, parent coordinator, guidance counselor, service providers, and (bilingual) speech pathologists. Many of these staff members can provide translation assistance and valuable information to the parents as well. At P.S. 58, parental outreach is also accommodated through the assistance of the Parent Coordinator who will hold informative meetings and other activities to expand parent involvement. This is achieved through the in-person meetings during the allotted parent engagement period, phone calls, translated letters, direct e-mails, and entry on individual student accounts. Records may be kept in student cumulative folders, in Google Docs, and in a data binder. Our blue “Parent Connection Folder” is the main place where we write down all contact with parents and topics discussed. In addition, parents are invited to monthly informational meetings during the day (in our school library) where they are offered information, taught various things such as “Know your Rights”, as well as learn about other workshops they can attend. Many of these meetings are offered by our PTA but our ENL Teachers sometimes participate and then have one-on-one contact with some of these parents to see if they have any questions. We are also working on using EDAT to gather and use more data pertaining to parents and students. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 1  Parent involvement at P.S. 58 is ongoing and conducted in cooperation with the parent coordinator, other teachers, member of the Lighthouse Team – Leader in Me, Guidance Counselor, PTA. Parents are included and invited to many activities, workshops, and meetings held here at P.S. 58. This, of course, includes the parents of ELLs. As stated previously, parents of ELLs are welcomed every Tuesday at 2:30 during Parent Engagement time, as well at other various times throughout the school year. The Parent Coordinator as well as the PTA president are welcomed onto many teams and involved in many events at our school. This can include our LAP Team which gets together 3-6 times per year to discuss things. Parents of newly enrolled Kindergartn students are invited to bring their children into school for mini-assessment as well as to meet and great with ENL staff to discuss our program and to have an opportunity to ask questions in a one-on-one format. We usually invite them the first two days of summer vacation as well as the week before school starts. Parents are given an opportunity to "Meet and Greet" the teachers at a parent orientation for all grade levels at the start of the school year. This includes meeting with all service providers and cluster teachers who explain their programs and share information with all parents. Throughout the school year, we offer workshops to all parents that include many subject areas, such as: Math, Art, Italian, ENL, STEAM, Reading and Writing just to name a few. There is also a Parent Inter-visitation Week where all parents have the opportunity to visit their child’s classroom and observe a lesson. Parents are invited to Literacy and Math Olympics, Pinning Ceremonies, Physical Challenges, Character and Vocabulary Parades, Jeopardy Day, Author’s Appreciation Day, and Student and Citizen of The Month Awards Ceremonies. We also have “Breakfast with the Principal” for Mother’s Day. Our Parent Coordinator makes sure that all parents receive information about everything happening here at P.S. 58. Information is also offered and delivered in a variety of languages which greatly benefits the parents of ELLs. Parents are also invited to attend our monthly PTA meetings, where they are given every opportunity to voice their concerns and questions. All meetings have translation services available to the parents. We have many social activities that involve all parents. For instance, we have a 9/11 Tribute Day, Parent Meet and Greet Sunset Barbeque, Multicultural Festival, Dance Showcases, The Italian Heritage Day, 6th Grade Bake Sales, PTA Bake Sales, Book Sales, Olympics for Math and ELA, Pinning Ceremonies, Character Counts, Healthy Eating Workshop, and the celebrations for moving up (Graduation) just to name a few. A possible idea for the future is another multicultural food festival that would include parents on many levels and infuse culture and tradition from various homes. Here at P.S. 58 we make every attempt to send parents information, letters, flyers, calendars, and school newsletters to keep them involved in the P.S. 58 school family. We also support and involve our parents during parent-teacher conferences by offering translators and translation services offered by the DOE, as well as using Google Translate to translate simple information to parents. P.S. 58 partners with various agencies – such as The Leader in Me which is for the whole school community – teachers, parents, students, administrators. Parents are invited to these events and workshops, as well as on field trips around NYC where we visit various organizations. We maintain relationships with the NY Public library two blocks away and with Maspeth Town Hall in order to provide parents with news about local opportunities for participation in community programs and services. Our Parent Coordinator will assemble and maintain a source of information about prospective opportunities for services or workshops offered to parents and students by outside agencies. The P.S. 58 administration, staff and parent coordinator at P.S. 58Q evaluate the needs of parents through many channels. Parents are given both formal and informal surveys on an ongoing basis. On Parent Teacher visitation days, parents are offered opportunities to fill out surveys in order to be a voice about things at P.S. 58. They are given the opportunity to share their ideas and suggestions at meetings and conferences, which are then noted for further evaluation. Parents also participate in filling out the NYC Parent Surveys. We then assess all data collected. After reviewing all parent surveys, we then set up workshops or meetings to meet their needs. We also address concerns at PTA meetings and SLT meetings. We provide translation services at these meetings if needed. Parents’ needs are met based on all the data collected. Our Parent Coordinator, Maria Agugliaro, ensures that all parents are included and involved in all school activities and that all parents receive information and notifications in a wide variety of languages. She is also available for meetings to support and evaluate the needs of all parents, including the parents of ELLs, as well as maintains a parent information board where flyers and information is posted and updated for all parents. Parents may then give feedback based on what is offered to them. Our Parent Coordinator also assists with collecting and analyzing the Parent Surveys, which also helps greatly in evaluating the needs of parents. The workshops, orientations, after-school center and Parent/Teacher Conferences provided or arranged for by the Parent Coordinator at P.S. 58Q are directly aligned with the parents needs as per their requests both verbally and through data from the surveys. The parental involvement activities address the needs of the parents in many ways. First, by involving parents in 2  all school activities, such as shows, celebrations, Pinning ceremonies, Spirit Day, Jeopardy, STEAM Challenges, ELA and Math Olympics and awards ceremonies, it makes it possible for our parents to see the success and growth of their children on a regular basis. Parents can proudly recognize the achievements of their child/children. Parents stay in touch with the daily lives of their children, thus fostering a stronger communication bond both socially and academically. Specific parent involvement activities include 9/11 Tribute Day, Parent Classroom Orientation (they get to see their child's class and view a lesson), Parent Meet and Greet Barbecue, School Bake Sale, School Book Sale, School Multicultural Dance, Holiday Show, School Fund Raisers (Miss Chocolate, etc.), as well as the Halloween Character Parade. Several parents are also members of the PTA. Through these activities, the parents are also given many more opportunities to get to know the school staff on many different levels. Parents and teachers are able to communicate on a more regular basis. It is the goal of the administration, staff and Parent Coordinator of P.S. 58Q to constantly improve communication with the parents in any way possible. The cultural activities make it possible for parents meet and socialize with parents from different cultures, as well as the teachers, which help to develop a friendly, cooperative, school “family” environment. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. P.S. 58Q provides quality integrated and standalone ENL instruction to all ELL students of all levels. This is effective in providing the varied linguistic needs of the students while reinforcing content area instruction. ENL specialists work in collaboration with classroom teachers to design instruction that is age appropriate/culturally appropriate and comprehensible to ELL students at all levels while maintaining rigorous instructional standards in learning standards and content area instruction - with a very strong emphasis on Academic Vocabulary. During any form of instruction, the ENL specialists work in groups with ELL students to reinforce language development through providing content area instruction at an appropriate linguistic level while avoiding reducing the instructional level of the content area instruction. ENL specialists provide high standards, and content area instruction which the students can understand and benefit from at an accessible linguistic level. Students are challenges through a wide variety of activities as well as taking on many leadership roles which challenge them on other levels. This approach is highly effective in raising the linguistic levels of the ELL students while simultaneously providing the highest level academic instruction in content areas. `All data is reviewed regularly (and quarterly) and instruction is always data-driven. New data is reviewed immediately and on-going throughout the school year. Baselines are also given multiple times per year and reviewed for next steps, plans of action, differentiated instruction, and for small groups teaching lessons. Overall, P.S. 58 tries to ensure that all the students’ needs (on all levels) are met in as many ways as possible – and the whole staff and community continue to work together as a family to grow and make this happen. 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Adelina V. Tripoli, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The School of Heroes School DBN: 24Q058 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Adelina V. Tripoli Title Principal Teresa LaBarbera Assistant Principal Maria Agugliaro Parent Coordinator C. Braico, PFaherty,E.Csillik ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent George Xu, Technology Teacher/Subject Area Suzanne Duroseau, Math Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Tina Wright School Counselor Madeline Chan Yazmin Torres Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Anna Giudice, AP Other A/P Christine Arundel, AP Other A/P Kathleen DaCosta Other Speech Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/6/18 9/6/18 9/6/18 9/6/18 N/A 9/6/18 9/6/18 N/A N/A 9/6/18 9/6/18 9/6/18 9/6/18 9/6/18 9/6/18 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q058 School Name: 058 Superintendent: Madeline Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maria Cathy Eva Peter Agugliaro Parent Coordinator Yes Braico Csillik Faherty ENL Teacher ENL Teacher ENL Teacher No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 58Q uses a variety of data to assess our schools written translation and oral interpretation needs. The Home Language Surveys at registration are used not only to identify possible ELLs, but also to keep track of what the preferred language of communication is for parents at our school. This is identified in Part III of the HLIS forms. We also use the Student Emergency Contact cards (blue cards) to gather this data if needed. ATS reports such as RPOB and Report of Preferred Languages, parent surveys and teacher surveys (collected by class) are also ways we collect data on parents' preferred languages. The RCPL ATS report is used to determine parents preferred language. Using HLIS surveys completed upon student registration (as well as the Emergency Blue Cards), we identified the main language groups in P.S.58Q to include English, Mandarin and Cantonese Chinese, Spanish, and 6  Pilipino (Tagalog). There is also Arabic, Indonesian, Tibetan, Turkish, some Punjabi, Bengali, Burmese, Nepali, and Polish. There is also a small representation of speakers of Portuguese, Urdu and Vietnamese. ATS provides us with helpful data and reports in order to assess the language needs of parents, such as the RCPL and the RPOB. We use the RPOB report which helps us group languages and the numbers needed when we must distribute and send information home (such as fliers, letters, and notifications). The RHLA report also gives us data regarding home languages. Class surveys are also taken at the beginning of the year and then collected again before report cards are distributed in which teachers keep a list of what language both report cards and information needs to be sent home. A list of request for translators for parent-teacher meetings by parents is also kept. This data is then sent down to the main office and the pupil accounting secretary compiles a list for future reference. For Special Education students, the school may use current IEPs also as data for the language spoken and written by the parents. This is also noted by both the child's teacher, the school psychologist and the guidance counselor. Our Parent Coordinator also assists with compiling data regarding the language needs of parents. In order to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand, P.S. 58 makes every effort to use any and all translation services available, both written and oral. Our school keeps a written list of translators available at our school in our Parent Information Case (EPIC). We currently have Spanish, Chinese, Hungarian, Italian, Greek, Polish, and Portuguese translators in our building. For anyone else, we use the Translation Unit offered by the DOE. Upon examination of the CEP, Home Language Surveys, and RPOB report, we then identify the presence of qualified written and oral translators for each of the languages in the school. Specifically, we found that there are many translators for Spanish. We have three teachers who can translate Spanish, one school psychologist, one social worker, one school aide and eight paraprofessionals. For Chinese, we have one teacher, one para and one school aide. We have one teacher on staff who can translate Hungarian. Our occupational therapist translates Spanish. Our Speech pathologist can translate both Spanish and Portuguese. One Physical Therapist and a classroom teacher can translate Polish. Our other Speech pathologist can translate Greek and Spanish. One special education classroom teacher is able to translate Spanish. We also have several teachers and administrators who speak and translate Italian. We have discovered that the large majority of parents from these main groups still prefer information sent to them in their native language. Parents have communicated this to both their child's teacher and on various written surveys. Our school has every parent fill out a form stating what their preferred language of communication is and that information is kept in the main office. Even though P.S. 58 makes every effort to communicate with parents in any way possible, several of the parents in this community are new arrivals to the United States and are still learning English or speak no English at all. It is sometimes difficult for them to find friends or relatives to translate written correspondence from the Department of Education, P.S.58, or their child’s classroom teacher. This sometimes results in a delay in communication of important information and hinders the ability of the parent to respond to communications in a timely fashion. Because of these findings, P.S. 58 uses the methodologies described above to try to communicate with parents in every possible way. We are always working on ways to improve communications with all parents in our school community. We now use many translation programs to ensure that things are translated into various languages for the parents, especially notices about meetings and orientations. 7  Within meetings and faculty conferences, all staff members are made aware of the variety of language needs within the school and the translation services available to them and the parents of our students. Information is shared and distributed often. There is a Parent Notification Bulletin Board that is updated with a variety of notices in a variety of languages. There are also fliers and New York City information on the counter in our main office also available to the parents in several languages. Our guidance counselor and school psychologist both keep parent informational fliers in any languages available. Parents are able to take these fliers home for reference in their language if available. When we have no staff members who can translate the other languages, we use the Department of Education’s translation service hot-line for parent-teacher conferences and meetings with parents (such as IEP meetings or behavior/academic meetings). We also use the DOE website which has a lot of information and letters translated into a large variety of languages. The Internet is also used for written translations on a case-by-case basis. We often use Google Translation and translation application on Smart Phones to translate messages, notices and letters for parents that we send home. Our technology teacher often translates letters using Internet services for the ELL Department that informs parents of upcoming meetings and orientations. We will have a new full-time parent coordinator, who acts as our primary Language Access Coordinator, who uses the Translation and Interpretation Unit as needed. She also ensures that fliers and surveys are distributed in the appropriate home languages. She will make every effort to assist and guide the parents with support in their home languages. In some cases, we also have parent volunteers who can also help with translation services. If needed, we have a contract with L.I.S. (Language Interpretation Services) and we also pay for translation services if no other translators or resources are available. In summary, P.S. 58 ensures that all parents are provided with information in a language they can understand. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Chinese Unknown Dialect Mandarin Cantonese Spanish Polish Arabic Philipino Indonesian Nepali Punjabi Tibetan Turkish Albanian 429 85 7 129 18 236 29 18 16 11 9 7 6 6 4 41.4% 8.2% 0.7% 12.5% 1.7% 22.7% 2.7% 1.7% 1.5% 1.1% 0.8% 0.7% 0.6% 0.6% 0.4% 429 85 7 129 18 236 29 18 16 11 9 7 6 6 4 41.4% 8.2% 0.7% 12.5% 1.7% 22.7% 2.7% 1.7% 1.5% 1.1% 0.8% 0.7% 0.6% 0.6% 0.4% 8  Urdu Bengali Portugal Vietnamese Burmese Korean Russian Czech French Hungarian Hindi Romanian Serbo-Croatian 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 0.4% 0.3% 0.3% 0.3% 0.2% 0.2% 0.2% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 0.4% 0.3% 0.3% 0.3% 0.2% 0.2% 0.2% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Mandarin Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Informational letters and notifications to and from parents including information on all school-wide activities. This is distributed throughout the school year on an on-going basis. Report Card information and Parent Teacher Conferences Four times per year - November, January, March, May (and ongoing as needed) Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We translate documents using either a staff member, Google Translate, or by using the services of the Translation Interpretation Unit. Also, we distribute any available information already translated into various languages on the DOE website. We translate documents using either a staff member, Google Translate, or by using the services of the Translation Interpretation Unit. 9  Winter Concert flier (held the week before winter break) Distributed in December Spring Concert flier (held the week before spring break) Distributed in March or April (depending on the date of the concert Movie Night May or June Bake Sales During all four open school nights, as per the DOE calendar Graduation and Stepping Up Cermonies June ELA and Math Olympics Four to six times per year Award and Pinning Ceremonies During all four open school nights, as per the DOE calendar Student and Citizen of the Month Awards Monthly Information about after-school programs such as ELA and Math test prep programs, February After School ENL classes for Parents. Usually May School trip slips, enrichment programs, student supply lists Ongoing Notification of IEP meetings Ongoing School calendars Monthly Annual handbooks September Safety procedures September and ongoing We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. 0  Newsletters to parents September and ongoing NYS Testing Calendar dates and letters regarding testing Before State tests, usually in January Parent Orientation meetings for ELLs September, November, January, March, June Parent Surveys (for program choice), parent program notification letters (i.e. Entitlement letters, Brochures) and parent workshops. Ongoing We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. HLIS forms are given out in the parent's preferred language at registration and that all information is filled out and the parents have the opportunity to ask questions and find out any information needed regarding the school. Our parent coordinator helps with all these translations and communication. All year - ongoing We translate using a staff member or Google Translate, or the services of the Language Interpretation Unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences Four times a year as per DOE calendar Tuesdays Parent Engagement Time Every Tuesday when school is in attendance interpretation service(s)? Each year we have staff members available to help with translations during the conferences. During these conferences we also use the Translation Unit hotline that the DOE offers. Two or three staff members wait at phone extensions in order to put translators through into the classrooms when the teachers need it. Each teacher is given a memo with the extensions to call when a translator is needed for these meetings. Parents are able to set up a meeting on an as-needed basis with the teachers in our school and come to school to discuss any information needed regarding their children, 1  Meet and Greet the Teacher During the first full week of school in September PTA meetings Monthly ENL Department Parent Orientation Meetings Four to Seven times yearly based on new enrollments (September, November, January, March, June) and parent engagement time on Tuesdays (for parents who were not able to attend previous meetings and orientations) Parent Interviews at registration On-going throughout the school year school-wide events, report card grades, promotion in doubt, etc. We also use translators during these meetings if necessary or contact the DOE Translation Unit for assistance. The teachers get to talk to the parents about curriculum and upcoming expectations for the school year. The parents can ask about the State Testing and find out about our school's grading system. We also use translators during these meetings if necessary or contact the DOE Translation Unit for assistance. Parents have the opportunity to discuss any school issues that concern them during PTA meetings where translators are available if needed. On occasion bilingual staff members are offered per session pay to translate at these meetings. Each school year in order to inform the parents of new ELL students about our ENL program as well as allow the parents to fill out a Parent Selection Form and make a choice regarding ENL, Dual Language or Bilingual Programs here in New York City. During these meetings, our ENL Department offers translations in Chinese from our computer teacher, Mr. Xu and in Spanish from our ENL teacher Ms. Csillik. If other translations are needed we contact the translation unit for assistance. Other translations are also done in written form and through the translated informational videos that the DOE provides. Face to face meetings are also done with parents at registration. A member of our ENL Department interviews the parents (and students) of new registrants in order to determine Home Language Status. At these one on one meetings, there is always an oral translator available for Spanish and Chinese that way the communication with the parents is done effectively. If we need to translate other languages, we use either Google Translate or we use the Translation Unit hot-line from the DOE. 2  IEP meetings On-going throughout the school year P.S.58 also use translators during these meetings if necessary or contact the DOE Translation Unit for assistance. Moreover, our budget secretary uses the money in Galaxy to hire oral translators from a New York City approved agency. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency limited -English-proficient families will be contacted by one of the bilingual/multilingual BRT (Building Response Team) members which include the following languages: Spanish, Chinese (Mandarin), Italian, Portuguese, Greek, Polish, and Hungarian. For other low-incident languages, Language Line will be used. The DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit will be called to ensure clear communication with families. P.S.58 will make every effort to communicate by any means possible. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. P.S. 58 ensures that all staff members are aware of the goal of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663. We hold an administrative staff meeting at the beginning of each school year where the administration reviews and goes over all of the Chancellor's regulations including regulation A-663. The staff members are given a copy of all the regulations and have the opportunity to ask questions and clarify information. Upon receipt of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663, all staff and teachers sign for it. The staff is informed of all translation resources available to meet compliance including DOE support. The parent coordinator tries her best to attend periodic training sessions to turn-key information regarding to translation and interpretation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 58Q provides each parent who requires language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in their language of choice and instructions on how to obtain such services. Parents in need of translation and interpretation services are also informed about the Department of Education’s website providing information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services. Furthermore, P.S. 58Q posts in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance of our school the DOE sign displaying that "New York City schools can help you in your own language" informing parents in various languages about their language rights. 3  The P.S. 58Q safety plan will contain procedures for further ensuring that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. If the parents of more than 10% of the children at PS58Q speak a primary language that is neither English nor a language of choice, we obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into that language of the signage and forms required. Our parent coordinator makes sure that any brochures/fliers/letters shared with parents together with any parent engagement events in P.S.58Q are meeting the needs of limited-English-proficient parents' translation and interpretation needs. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school uses Parent Surveys, Polls, Workshops, and discussions at PTA meetings on a regular basis to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of our school's translation and parent communication services. Each school year parents are sent home a form and surveys to ask what their preferred method of communication is and what language they would prefer to use with school staff. Parents at PTA meetings (as well as the PTA president) also give feedback to the administration about their satisfaction regarding translated communications and that is noted. Many speakers of Chinese have expressed an interest in even more availability of translations in both written and oral form and we have taken steps to ensure this happens, as our Asian community has grown. We have already sent home invitations and tear-off slips to parents in both Chinese and Spanish for a variety of formal and informal Parent events (Parent Orientation, Parent Meetings, Nutrition Classes for Parents, ENL Classes for Parents, etc.) and use Google Translate to satisfy this need in some of the other lower-incidence languages. In the future, we may consider forming a focus group of parents that represent various cultures and languages in order to gather more feedback for our school. 4 
