 30Q070 School Name: P.S. 070 QUEENS Principal: DONNA GELLER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information THE LIEUTENANT JOSEPH PETROSINO SCHOOL 343000010070 Elementary School Number (DBN): 30Q070 30 – 44 43rd Street Long Island City, New York 11103 718-728-4646 Phone Number: 718-204-6808 Fax: Donna C. Geller DGeller@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Donna C. Geller Valerie Waxman Carmen Chirila Email Address: Parents’ Association President: PanagiotaIgnatiadis SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Amina Laaoubi andVanessa Alayon-Stewart N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent’s Office Address: Dr. Philip Composto Superintendent: 28 -11 Queens Plaza North Long Island City New York 11101 pcompos@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-391-8323 Phone Number: 718-391-6147 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens North Lawrence Pendergrast FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North L.I.C., NY 11101 lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name *Donna C. Geller(Staff 1) *Valerie Waxman(Staff 2) *Carmen Chirila(Parent 1) Tea Julevic(Staff 3) Vanessa Alayon-Stewart (Parent 2) n/a n/a GeorgeDzanoucakis PanagiotaIgnatiadis AurelaNomani Teresa Rotondi Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Staff 4 Staff 5 Staff 6 Staff 7   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Catherine Waxman KatiaArgudo Yi An Yang Awan SamiraFargali Christine Haber Maria LyristKokonas AminaKouritii Staff 8 Parent 3 Parent 4 Parent 5 Parent 6 Parent 7 Parent 8 Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Mission of PS 70 is to provide all students with the opportunity to succeed in a child centered environment that: •is organized for effort, •communicates clear expectations and utilizes fair and credible evaluations based on the Next Generation Learning Standards, •continually strives to enhance the dedicated efforts of our effective educators whose successful practices and knowledge help students achieve excellence,   •formally recognizes the accomplishments of all students and increase students performance levels in literacy as reflected by reading levels, writing levels and the ability to carry on a conversation about a topic, •is based on multiple forms of assessment and Inquiry Work, educators will differentiate instruction and tasks to support students in developing skills that promote love of learning and increase their overall performance levels, •focuses on the Next Generation Learning Standards as a benchmark for educators to cultivate academic success through diverse learning experiences, and, •challenges students through high level questioning with the intent of fostering higher order thinking skills. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 70 strives for high levels of academic achievement. The goal is to deepen our students’ thinking skills and understanding for achieving academic success and the ability for demonstrating gained knowledge through effective communication. To that end, the learning environment is enhanced with read-alouds, echo reading, independent reading, literature circles, vocabulary enrichment, accountable talk, writing activities, comparisons in thought, mathematical problem solving, inquiry based science, and research based social studies integrated with technology and the arts. As a Magnet School for the Expressive Arts, we strive to infuse our arts theme into everything we do in the classroom. Our art program provides activities in drawing, painting, art history, sculpture, printmaking and crafts. The program is sequentially developed on disciplined based art education and is aligned with the New York City Blueprint For Teaching and Learning in Visual Arts and Next Generation Learning Standards. Art concepts are taught through activities based on the elements of design: line, shape, form, texture, space, color and value. Art instruction lends itself to integrating with other subject areas. The purposes of these activities are to help students develop awareness of, and appreciation for, the skills in communicating through art, and a feeling of pride and satisfaction in their work. Multicultural art activities are infused into the curriculum. Art in the elementary school gives students the opportunity to develop an interest in art appreciation and to develop critical and creative thinking skills. The music program at PS70, which also follows the standards, provides an opportunity for all students to receive a comprehensive performance-based music education and to receive instruction in recorder. Through the study of a wide range of music literature students can become intelligent consumers, producers, and/or creators of music. The high level of motivation required for performance courses is an invaluable asset to educational growth. In addition to our arts and music programs, each grade level puts on a performance or dance festival integrated with their grade specific social studies curriculum. These performances provide our students with an opportunity to share and develop their individual interests, talents and skills with the support of the staff and school community. Parents are invited and welcomed into our school for these special performances. All Cluster teachers, including Art, Library Media, Music, Physical and Health Education, Social Studies, Science and Vocabulary Enrichment, integrate content and technology with a creative approach to encourage peer collaboration. Students engage risk-free, competitive forums of Jeopardy sessions. Furthermore, the "Vocabulary Enrichment" program at PS 70 is one that instructs students on Tier 2 vocabulary words, also known as Academic English. It is a more meaningful and effective approach to teaching vocabulary. The strategies employed are research based and provide rigorous and robust instruction that is meaningful and engaging. Emotion is at the core of this program because, as research has shown, "children become interested in words when instruction is rich and lively." Contrary to the traditional or de-contextualized approach to instruction in which students passively look up words in the dictionary and write down the definitions, each word is taught in a natural and meaningful context. Students that are engaged in frequent exposures with new words through a variety of mediums including, reading, writing, games, songs, and meaningful conversations and activities. Through this process, students develop "word consciousness" and "word ownership." They know the words well and use them easily and appropriately. They react to uses of the words with relish and take obvious pleasure and pride in incorporating them into their speech and writing. Furthermore, the true indicator of learning being that they begin to independently increase their verbal repertoire as they become aware of and learn words beyond the classroom environment. 0  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 70 is located in an ethnically diverse neighborhood in Long Island City, Queens. As an elementary school comprised of grades Pre-Kindergarten through grades 5, our school serves approximately 900 students and the needs of gifted and general education students, English language learners, and students with special needs. Our student body is comprised of 42% Hispanic, 36% Caucasian, 17% Asian, and, 3% African American students. The student body includes 25% English Language Learners and 14% Students with Special Needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school’s instructional focus this year is to improve the quality of student writing. Students will write fiction, non-fiction, persuasive and opinion-based works that will meet grade level standards. In order to meet this goal, teachers administered a baseline assessment to immediately help determine the strengths and weaknesses of each writer. Additionally teachers met to develop and revise rubrics. The data collected from the baseline will drive instruction to help the students plan and organize their writing. Within each writing unit, children are asked to self-reflect, peer edit and utilize rubrics that contain clear expectations for each written task. These steps support their creation of original, well-constructed pieces of writing. The ultimate goal is for students to see that writing is a part of real world experiences. Additionally, we have undertaken a school wide initiative to focus more effectively using assessments to drive instruction. Our teachers use varying methods to access the knowledge their students have attained in lessons across the different content areas. To most effectively meet this goal, our staff takes into account the diverse needs of learners at all grade levels. Teachers often use dry erase boards and/or Promethean boards which provide on the spot information for determining if students need further instruction or assistance. In addition, weekly assessments are used to group students and create small groups. These assessments provide teachers with data indicating which students mastered a skill. This process enables teachers to offer enrichment projects to students who require acceleration, while identifying students who need additional small group instruction and RTI support. Through flexible groupings created using formal and informal assessments, our teachers are able to design instruction with multiple entry points, thereby providing students with an optimal learning environment. The Chancellor’s Framework for Great Schools develops a culture of collaborative professional learning as a priority. As a school community we employ a multitude of methods to aid teachers in achieving this goal. Teachers receive weekly professional development aligned to the school curriculum and to the Next Generation Learning Standards. Teachers are offered the opportunity to share best practices throughout our school community. In addition PLC’s take place every Tuesday afternoon. Within our schedule/program, each grade is given the opportunity to meet during arranged common planning periods. Through both formal and informal classroom observations, administrators present teachers with specific feedback and recommendations regarding questioning, the nature of student discussion, and the use of assessment to guide instruction. These professional conversations are an excellent tool for teacher growth and enable teachers to self-reflect and improve their practice. The Danielson Framework has improved communications with administration and pedagogical staff by providing a common language for our practice. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q070 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 880 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 37 35 37 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 8 39 37 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 77.0% % Reduced Lunch 21.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 42.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 37.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.1 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 57.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 93% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 71 71 37 94.5% 5.6% 12.2% 3.0% 15.6% 2.0% 6 10% 8.9 56.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. As per the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, PS 70 institutes "curriculum and instruction designed to engage students, foster critical thinking skills, and are aligned to the Common Core." At PS 70, 100% of teachers say that they had resources to include opportunities for reading and writing grounded in evidence from text. 2. According to The Framework for Great Schools, “The curriculum must meet students where they are and customize inclusive, motivating instruction.” As we continue to implement rigorous writing instruction and practice aligned to the Common Core within and across grades to drive instructional planning, we aim to ensure that the targeted usage of ongoing assessment strengthens, leading to increased achievement. The lowest achieving quartile of students, ENL students, and students with disabilities are a priority when developing and aligning curriculum and assessment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of students in Kindergarten through Grade 5 will demonstrate the ability to effectively state a claim and to cite text evidence when writing informational and argumentative pieces as measured by baseline, midterm and final assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will meet to monitor student writing progress towards the Next Generation Learning Standards and make unit and instructional adjustments accordingly. Teachers will present materials in their areas of expertise at grade-level meetings. Teachers will utilize a combination of formative unit based assessment and ongoing informal assessment across content areas to strategically implement explicit small group strategy instruction. Administration will review and discuss data with classroom teachers to target specific intervention support for ENLs and SWDs. Information about their progress will be reviewed with the grade in an effort to improve and shift practice. Teachers will communicate with parents about students' goals, needs, and curriculum development through conferences, open classroom visits and narrative reports. All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Weekly All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Monthly All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Weekly All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Weekly Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Monthly Parent Workshops given by Parent Coordinator, Instructional Coaches and Content Specific Cluster Teachers  Monthly Parents as Reading Partners  Weekly Parent Engagement Meetings given during Tuesday afternoons by Individual teachers and grades  Monthly or Weekly Sharing Notes from Principal, Parent Letters and Teacher Newsletters  Remind Application by Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Weekly professional development time to facilitate collaboration and teacher growth 4  -Administration, Instructional Coaches and Cluster Specialists will provide support to Teacher Teams and individuals based on need -External consultants/trainers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 30% of students will show an improvement on their Writing Mid-year Assessment (inclusive of grammar and vocabulary). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Writing Middle-Of-the-Year Assessment administered in February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. As per the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, PS 70 "establishes a culture where students feel safe, challenged to grow, and supported to meet high expectations." At PS 70, 100% of teachers say that their students feel it is important to come to school every day, 95% of teachers say that students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms, and cafeteria, and, 95% of teachers say that adults in this school teach students how to advocate for themselves. 2. According to The Framework for Great Schools, "students are excited to learn and actively engage in classrooms that are welcoming, safe, and orderly. Student-centered learning environments develop students who push and support each other, creating a collaborative and generous atmosphere in the classroom." Thus, continued opportunities to support the social and emotional growth and learning of all students, will be incorporated in the 2018-2019 school year. 3. At PS 70 we strive to create a safe, friendly and respectful school and classroom environment for all students in accordance with Chancellor's Regulation A-823 and Respect for All. Monthly Behavior Code Assemblies are presented to all grades by the Guidance Counselor on character builders and personal health and safety. Respect for All assembly is presented by the Guidance Counselor and discusses how to handle bullying, how to get help, different reactions to bullying, conflict resolution and decision making, cyberbullying/Internet safety and sexual harassment. In addition, our staff receives Professional Development on student discrimination, harassment, intimidation/bullying, cyberbullying and Internet safety in accordance with Chancellor's Regulation A-823 and Respect for All. Teachers continue to teach Respect for All in their classrooms through activities and lessons/ Student of the Month Character Awards are given each month to students who demonstrate good character, such as respect for others, tolerance, patience and responsibility. Using evidence based approaches for integrating social and emotional learning into schools, such as Sanford Harmony, Morning Side Center for Teaching Social Responsibility, Common Sense Media, Beautiful Me, and other programs based on school budgeting, we will continue to strive to increase the ways in which we are encouraging positive behaviors and building good character in our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Guidance Counselor will provide at least three different professional learning opportunities to further train 100% of staff members, specifically new teachers, paraprofessionals and those in ICT and ELL classrooms, with strategies to address student behavior effectively in the classroom. The participation in, and information provided during these professional learning opportunities, will be memorialized in sign-in sheets, notes and reflection forms kept by the Principal and the Guidance Counselor. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development for all teachers and paraprofessionals revolving around restorative practices. Inquiry groups throughout the year will be devoted to studying Sanford Harmony, Morning Side Center for Teaching Social Responsibility, Common Sense Media, and Beautiful Me. Inquiry group participants will come together in a whole staff community where inquiry groups that have studied evidence-based social and emotional learning will present information and materials gathered throughout the study. In conjunction with the school's Guidance Counselor, Psychologist and School Mental Health Consultant, teachers will have established behavior management routines and structure in the classrooms to provide strategies for the social-emotional needs of students. Behavior Code Assemblies with Role Play Our Guidance Counselor and Social Worker will collaborate with teachers to present lessons to improve students' self advocacy skills when confronted with challenging situations. They will support students in classrooms on character education, conflict resolution, tolerance, acceptance and respect for all. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers and Paraprofessionals 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor All Teachers and Paraprofessionals 9/2018-6/2019 All Teachers and Students 9/2018-6/2019 All Teachers and Students 9/2018-6/2019 All Teachers and Students 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor, Psychologist and School Mental Consultant Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. -Families will be supported through our Guidance Office. 7  -Scheduled parent workshops, student assemblies and teacher professional development will be conducted September 2018 through May 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Resources and lesson plans obtained from and Professional Development provided by: Sanford Harmony, Morning Side Center for Teaching Social Responsibility, Common Sense Media, and Beautiful Me. -SmartBoards, Promethean Boards, laptops, basic classroom supplies such as paper, markers, crayons, rulers, and pencils/pens. -Support from Instructional Coaches related to lesson plan implementation. -Substitute teachers to cover classroom teachers attending PD sessions. -Support and resources provided by School Mental Health Consultant. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, in accordance with the Quality Review School Culture Rubric, teachers will be provided with at least one professional session and students with at least two assemblies around goals set in place. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Logs maintained by the Principal and the Guidance Department. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. As per the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, "teachers participate in opportunities to develop, grow, and contribute to the continuous improvement of the school community." At PS 70, 91% of teachers says that teachers feel responsible that all students learn, and 83% of teachers say that teachers at this school work together to design instructional programs 2. As per the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 59% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. According to the Framework for Great Schools, “Teachers acquire skills and expertise by being provided opportunities for them to develop, grow, and learn from peers and experts.” We will ascertain that our teachers innovate and hone their practice through continuous learning and frequent professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will receive one period of scheduled collaboration time and/or common planning per week to develop and implement comprehensive supports and extensions in reading, writing and math to maximize content understanding and to provide entry points for all students, as evidenced by grade attendance sheets and minutes. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Kindergarten through fifth grade teachers will incorporate a writing study each month starting in September. In math, teachers will complete performance tasks after each chapter. Ongoing participation will be recorded using team attendance sheets. All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Teacher teams will utilize unit plans and New York State Common Core and Next Generation Learning Standards based on grade, that will guide instructional practices, student engagement and assessments. All Teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers will continue to collect data throughout the year and present findings, including strengths and weaknesses, to the entire faculty during Monday Professional Development. All Teachers 9/2018- 6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. -Weekly opportunities to engage families supervised by grade supervisors (Assistant Principals) -Tuesday Parent Involvement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Weekly Professional Development sessions -Support of Instructional Coaches -Laptops, SmartBoards/Promethean Boards -Scheduling to allow teacher inter-visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 0  X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, teachers will analyze each student's improvements in literacy and math and revise action plan as necessary. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Middle of the Year Assessments administered in February 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. As per the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, "school leadership inspires the school community with a clear instructional vision and effectively distributes leadership to realize this vision." At PS 70, 87% of parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school, and, 86% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for this school. 2. According to The Framework for Great Schools, "The principal sets the tone for the school, develops a climate of inclusiveness, and inspires staff and students with a clear vision for student achievement. The goal of a strong school leader is to build coherent instructional and social-emotional support that improves student achievement. School leaders support teacher development by consistently offering professional development opportunities and providing meaningful feedback. They seek input through regular meetings with all members of the community." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, School Administrators will effectively communicate high expectations for improved writing skills, as evidenced in all content areas, supported through Professional Development and effective feedback provided following formal and informal observations that will result in 65% of teachers receiving Effective ratings in components of the Advance System. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Set school-wide monthly expectations focused on specific components/elements for each Domain to meet the needs of all learners with emphasis on subgroups including students receiving ESL, SETSS, ICT, AIS and Speech and language support. All Teachers and Support Specialists 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers will incorporate Danielson best practices within common core aligned revised curriculum with specific strategies to meet the needs of subgroups including English language learners, special education and academic intervention services All Teachers and Support Specialists 9/2018-6/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-2019 school year, the Special Education and ELL Teams will hold two meetings for the parent community aimed at educating parents on the protocols and procedures that govern the IEP referral and implementation process and the NYSESLAT. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -External consultants -Instructional coaches -SmartBoard(s), laptops -Coverages to free teachers as part of an inter-visitation schedule Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other X X 3  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students with IEP Plans will demonstrate evidence of placement in the least restrictive environment with adequate modifications to fully participate in the general education curriculum. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Informal and formal observation reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. As per the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, PS 70 “forms effective partnership with families to improve the school.” At PS 70, 100% of teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet student needs, 93% of parents say that they have communicated with their child’s teacher about their child’s performance and 87% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn. 2. According to the Framework for Great Schools, “Schools create welcoming environments for families and take advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. The staff of a school welcomes, values and incorporates families and the larger community into inclusive schools and classrooms. Schools have a commitment to build strong partnerships with business and community-based organizations that enrich the school and the entire school community.” According to the School Quality Guide (2016-2017), “75% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.).” In another indicator of Parent Involvement, "87% of parents/guardians responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event (open house, back to school night, play, dance, sports event or science fair)." 2017-2018 saw a marked decline in in attendance at PA meetings (47% at mid-point assessment, effectively erasing gains made in previous year). However, Family Fun Nights (movies, dances, book swap/board game night) were well attended. Parents were also involved in Parent Coordinator/Title I events (Parent Nutrition Workshop by Cornell University, NYPD Self Defense course and the Parent Knit Club). A number (12-15) of parents who attended these events also volunteered at PA sales (Holiday Boutique, Valentine’s Day, Bake Sales, etc.). Again, while parents will attend Parent Association and Parent Coordinator sponsored events, they do not turn out for Parent Association meetings. Anecdotal evidence indicates four major reasons. 1. Meetings are viewed as “boring” and “too formal.” 2. Working parents cannot attend most meetings, especially if held in the morning. 3. The way PA Executive Board members present information regarding events (just announcing planned events) leaves parents feeling that everything is already decided and therefore there is little opportunity for parents to provide input or otherwise contribute in a meaningful way. 4. Some parents feel that communication regarding events is inadequate. Part 2 – Annual Goal 5  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, improved parent outreach will increase awareness and lead to a 5% increase in participation at Parent Association events (general meetings, workshops and family fun nights) as evidenced by sign-in sheets for events. A 3% increase in participation will be achieved at the mid-point assessment (February 2019) as evidenced by sign-in sheets for events. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Methods of communication with parents will be revised and improved: All Parents 9/2018 - 10/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, PA and Parent Coordinator  The Agenda notice will be redesigned to explicitly state breakfast will be served.  Emphasis will be placed on the workshops/speakers  taking place at the meetings. Signs regarding PA meetings and events will be more widely displayed in areas where parents congregate at drop-off and dismissal.  The PA monthly newsletter will be reinstated.  Translation services will be more widely used for these materials.  Digital methods of communication will be more widely used including email, Remind app, Facebook, Twitter and development of a PA website.  Minutes and other information presented at meetings will be distributed to parents before the next PA meeting via email. This will keep those parents who could not attend informed about PA and other school wide events. Interest in attendance at PA meetings will be increased by making meetings feel less formal: All Parents 9/2018 - 10/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, PA and Parent Coordinator  We will reinstate the use of raffles/door prizes.  Food served will be healthier and reflect the diverse cultures represented at PS 70 (an international breakfast similar to international dinner nights the PA has hosted in the past). Speakers and workshops will focus on subjects that are of importance to parents, including: Academic Support for Students (STEM, Literacy), Bullying and Health & Wellness, Nutrition and Physical Education. An effort will be made to coordinate academic workshop topics with Tuesday Parent Engagement workshops.   We will also work to increase the opportunities for parents to engage at the meetings with suggestions for activities, events or other issues of importance to them. 7  We will also increase our outreach for volunteers at PA events. If evening meetings are reinstated, we will use those meetings to showcase the students of PS 70 (Student of the Month, mini-talent shows, art exhibits, etc.). We will continue the use of surveys about the communication practices and parental preferences for meeting times, event times, types of events, workshops, etc. All Parents 9/2018 - 10/2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, PA and Parent Coordinator  A survey, targeting the parent body from grades Pre-K to 5, will be conducted in June 2018 about parent’s awareness of and satisfaction with PA events for the past year (2017-2018).  A survey, targeting the parent body from grades Pre-K to 5 will be conducted September/October 2018 regarding parental preferences for different activities. These activities can include: Workshops on Academic Support for STEM, Literacy, Math, Music and Arts and Computing Skills. Sports and dance activities such as, basketball games, Zumba, kickball, yoga, martial arts (demonstrations & mini-classes). Stress Relief and Creativity activities such as, crafting workshops (crochet, knitting, weaving), painting, meditation, yoga, Nutrition & Wellness workshops on Healthy Lifestyles, cooking, etc. Social Events such as carnivals, dances, dinners, book swaps, etc.  Based on the nature of the responses, the SLT will discuss  the preferred activities chosen by the parents. Each month a different activity can be scheduled. Follow up surveys will be conducted to assess parental satisfaction with the activities and workshops. These surveys will be conducted 2/2019 and 5/2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. -Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation -Tuesday Parent Engagement Workshops -Parent Coordinator Nutrition Workshops -Parents’ Association Social Events and Guest Speakers at Meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Survey Monkey to conduct surveys and analyze results -Paper, printing and mailing costs -Registration fees for website, web developer costs -Food and beverages supplied during parent events -Translation services Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By February 2019, effective communication will lead to a 3% increase in parent participation in Parent Association events. The types of events that draw the most interest will also be assessed. 2. This will be evidenced by the attendance sheets signed, tickets issued and volunteer lists for events. 3. In February 2019, progress will be reviewed, and adjustments will be made to the action plan if necessary. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Mid-year and end of year parent surveys (internal). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Morning Read Alouds, Small Group Instruction, Professional Periods of teachers; Choral Reading, Round Robin Reading, Independent Reading, Smart Board and Promethean Board interactive reading components of the program, interactive writings Read Alouds, manipulatives, Smart Board and Promethean Board interactive components of the program, During the Instructional Day; After School Guided Reading Groups, Differentiated Reading Groups, professional period one on one tutoring, RTI Small Group Instruction, GuidedMath Groups, Differentiated Math Groups, Professional Periods of teachers; During the Instructional Day; After school professional period, one on one tutoring, RTI interactive writings September Read Aloud, Small Group Instruction, Professional Periods of teachers; Foss Kits, Guided Science Clubs Work sampling for Pre k, Book Clubs, Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) September Diagnostic School Grade wide content areaexams; Baseline Assessments for K through 5, Running Records, Scale Scores on ELA September Diagnostic School and Grade wide content exams; Baseline Assessments for K through 5, Work sampling for Pre k, Math Scale Scores September Diagnostic School and Grade wide content exams Mathematics Science 0  Social Studies September Diagnostic School and Grade wide content exams At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) September Diagnostic School and Grade wide content area exams; Baseline Assessments for K through 5, Work sampling for PreK Scale Scores on ELAScale Sores for Math, Teacher observations, Pre k, Running Records, Standard Reading Inventories Differentiated Reading Groups, professional period one on one tutoring, RTI During the Instructional Day; After school Small Group Instruction, Professional Periods of teachers; During the Instructional Day; After school professional period one on one tutoring, During the Instructional Day Guided Reading Groups, Differentiated Reading Groups, professional period one on one tutoring, RTI Small Group Instruction, GuidedConversation Groups, Differentiated Reading Groups, Differentiated Math Groups professional period one on one tutoring, RTI Science Resource Room Experiments by individual students, interactive writings through the Science Projects using Scientific Method Read Alouds, Reading of actual documents, observing visuals and writtendocuments, interactive writings Read Alouds, Individual , Small Group Instruction, Guided Reading Groups, Differentiated Reading and MathGroups monthly behavior code assemblies that address social emotional issues through videos with follow up oral questions and conversations. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Fourteen students.  Guidance  At Risk Counseling  Referrals to outside agencies  Educational resources and supports  Address need for school supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. PS 70 is a Title I school. 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The Principal maintains an ongoing relationship with local universities and teaching colleges in order to engage student teachers in the daily work of our school. Moreover, the school receives countless resumes for vacancies. All teachers that are hired are assigned to teach classes in their licensed areas. Student teachers that have a relationship with our school and have received their proper certifications, are often hired as substitutes and/or regularly appointed teachers. As part of our efforts to support and educate our new teachers, monthly meetings with a specific focus are held by the Principal. Each new teacher is also assigned to an instructional coach as their individual mentor. Lastly, Assistant Principals, based on grade, meet with teachers for specific support. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The Principal provides the entire staff with revised School Policy and the School Instructional Handbooks that address: ●lesson planning ●successful best practices ●the standards and highly effective questioning based on the Depth of Knowledge Framework In addition, the Principal provides differentiated professional development opportunities based on need and expressed interest. Professional Learning Communities (PLC), including Inquiry Teams, will be expanded as part of our school’s efforts to enhance the existing collaborative environment. The differentiated professional development will take place every Monday after the instructional day and on Tuesdays following the Parent Engagement sessions. Principals and Assistant Principals use reference materials, participate in webinars and regional conferences and then turn key to the faculty. Instructional Coaches provide individual and group support sessions for teachers on successful lesson planning and practices. The Library Media Teacher provides information to staff on possible library resources for teachers and students. The IEP teacher meets 4  with Special Education and ICT teachers to provide SESIS trainings. ESL Teachers meet with supervisors of ESL to review new practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Four-year-old students attending pre-kindergarten classes follow the aligned New York State, Pre-kindergarten Common Core Curriculum . Pre-kindergarten teachers attend Professional Development sessions at monthly whole school conferences At these trainings the teachers observe lessons through Engage NY videos and other websites. Teachers must identify elements of modeled successful teaching practices related to building skills in literacy, math, science and social studies. The videos help to build awareness for the level of expectations that meet the Common Core Curriculum. Tuesdays during Professional work pre-kindergarten teachers address specific tools and methods (work sampling, methods of observing, etc, for academically rigorous lessons Parents of pre-kindergarten students are involved in attending scheduled parent workshops on a once month basis. Teachers are provided with instructional and social emotional support once a week through the pre-kindergarten social work, instructional support supervisor, Principal and Assistant Principals. Teachers meet during select common planning preparation periods to plan units of study with a thematic focus. Teachers base instruction on data about student performance, Teachers address their needs for early intervention and support paraprofessionals in providing Tier I intervention. If Tier II is needed the social worker, guidance counselor, assistant principal and speech teachers are contacted. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Principal met with the MOSL committee to review and discuss the assessment options available to measure progress and quality of instruction. Using a consensus model, the committee, as a whole, made its selections that would suit the needs of the students and that would best reflect the ongoing efforts of our staff. 5  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X . X Column B Section Reference(s) Part 4b of Section 5B, and 5D. Part 4b of Sections 5B, 5C, and 5D. Section 8 4c . Part 4b of Sections 5A, 5B, 5D, and 5E. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 6   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 70, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 70 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ●engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ●ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ●maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work with the Principal to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month, discuss with the Principal and file a report with the central office.; ●conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ●provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ●host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 9  ●schedule additional parent meetings, with the Principal e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ●translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops discussed with the Principal that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ●holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ●hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ●encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ●supporting or hosting Family Day events; ●establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ●encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers at special school events; ●providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ●developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ●providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 70 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; 0  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ●arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences. 1  Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In order to maximize academic achievement for ELLs and support school wide protocols, our after school program uses CCLS instructional materials/resources to support ELLS at grade levels: 3rd -5th grade in the development of their communication skills; listening, speaking, reading, and writing. There is a focus on vocabulary development within the content of each grade. The program will begin on October 24th 2018 and end on April 18th 2019. It will run beginning 3:00pm and end 4:30pm. The after school program supports language learners in acquiring academic language. It complements the existing "Vocabulary Enrichment" program at PS 70 of which instructs students on Tier 2 vocabulary words, also known as Academic English. Through meaningful and effective approaches of teaching vocabulary (utilizing the 4 hallmark instructional model)ELLs collaboratively participate in differentiated instruction that is catered to each ELLS needs. The strategies employed are research based and provide rigorous and robust instruction that is meaningful and engaging. There are four certified ESL teachers who teach the program in English and they will focus on the ELL beginner entering and intermediate emerging.The instructional materials are solely being used in the after school program and are being used to address the needs of the students served. Instructional Materials: Team teaching Ells for Academic Language Mastering (Continental)and Math Ready CCLS. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: School leadership has a clear school vision that includes high expectations for ELL student achievement that is supported by a purposeful plan of action; organization and structure is maximized for ample collaboration and planning time among teachers, school leadership, and all stakeholders. Curriculum and instruction at the school is aligned to CCLS standards and is infused with rigor that is implemented through differentiation methodologies. The school continuously monitors ELL student progress (student work, formal and informal assessments, test results), and systematically adjusts instructional planning based on a wide variety of evidence and data (google docs). Professional development consists of equipping staff with the knowledge to effectively collect, analyze, monitor and drive instruction through the use of data. Our instructional coaches, the school's ENL department, along with DOE training; teachers have been training in advance literacy methodologies for ELLs. Furthermore, the ELL policy and reference guide is shared and analyzed with staff members. The ELL Data reports are closely monitored. ELLs needs are addressed through multiple modalities and entry points as well as ESL methodologies such as UDL and inquiry. Teachers and school leadership know their ELL population and ELLS individual needs. Data is constantly being entered and monitored through 5  Part C: Professional Development google documents. The school has adopted google docs as a school wide data monitoring tool where all grades input their exit slips, formative and summative assessments . Teacher attend professional development on Mondays (2:45p.m.-3:50p.m.) and on Tuesday's starting (3:10p.m.-3:45p.m). Furthermore, teachers attend additional professional development provided by Queens North dept. Our professional development supports teachers in using content materials (ENL component), technology, visual support, skills that promote text to self, text to real life connections and a focus on the development of oral and written language skills using specific sentence frames to support language acquisition. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: PS70Q highly values parent and community involvement. As a school community, steps are taken to ensure that all stakeholders are a part of the school’s culture. Parent engagement activities and supports ensure that there are proper and adequate supports such as translation and interpretation services that meet the community’s needs. A parent Involvement calendar for the year is sent home where the parental involvement and engagement activities are noted. In addition to the parental engagement activities that are mandated on Tuesdays, the school hosts parental involvement workshops titled: parents as learning partners. Parents are invited to visit their child's classroom on one Friday every month from 8:10am -8:45am where they receive valuable workshops such as : supporting reading at home and at school, supporting math learning at home and at school, supporting writing, the arts at home and in school, word power which is vocabulary development everyday, social studies curriculum and learning about the world, the scientific process and critical thinking, physical education and health at home and in school, etc. This is just one component of our parent involvement that targets parents of ELLs in order to impact higher achievement of our ELLs. The Principal’s open door policy and parental engagement opportunities are implemented and are a part of the school's culture. Home and school communication provides the awareness of needs and in turn ensures that we provide home language supports. The multitude of languages are available representative of our population. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 6 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. ____ Purchased services  High quality staff ___ and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL ____ __ __ ____ __ ___ _____ __ N/A __ ___ ____ ____ N/A 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name The Lieutenant Joseph Petrosino School Borough Queens School Number 070 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Donna Condiles-Geller Coach Betty Ignatiadis ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Apostolidis Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Vistoso Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Dr. Philip Composto Assistant Principal Margarita Eracleous Coach Maria Palagian Antzoulis School Counselor Theresa Rotondi Parent Evie Ananiadis Parent Coordinator Maria Hernandez Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 4 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 11 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 1 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 805 8 Total number of ELLs 217 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.96%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? By using a multitude of tools to assess students early literacy skills it enables us to gain a clear understanding of how to plan for differentiated instruction. By assessing students work and using that data to drive instruction, students are given the opportunity to do well according to the modality they feel the most comfortable and succeed in. The reading street baseline assessment and NYSESLAT data is examined at the beginning of the school year. El Sol is used to determine Spanish literacy levels in the kindergarten bilingual class. Fountas and Pinnell reading level assessments are used four times a year to assess fluency, accuracy and comprehension. Reading Street curriculum baseline assessments and weekly unit assessments are used to determine the students’ literacy levels. Teacher created assessments, observations and evaluation of students’ reading and writing work is used on ongoing basis to determine students’ progress toward grade level. The school’s data indicates a need to improve communication skills. Direct instruction will be given in phonics, vocabulary, spelling, grammar and reading to better develop oral and written language skills. 9  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Formative Assessments , Exit Slips monitored through Google Docs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Data is constantly being analyzed and we are always evaluating our methodologies looking for improvement in so that we increase students success. Focus on NYSESLAT (results for each modality), NYSITELL , results from the NYS exams: ELA, Math, and Science are thoroughly examined in order to identify trends and make adjustments to instruction. We have identified that our students require tier 2 intervention in writing. Instruction is planned to provide strategies for improving vocabulary, comprehension and test taking skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? RTI by the classroom teacher and AIS by service providers and teachers for math and reading. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Reading intervention is determined by Reading Street baseline assessments. All students, regardless of Tier, receive Tier I instruction. Students who are below level receive Tier II through Reading Street strategic intervention lessons by the classroom teacher. One on one instruction is also provided by the classroom teacher, push in teacher, paraprofessional, SETSS teacher, and/or service provider. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. ELLs receive lower scores on content area assessments. Nyseslat school data indicates a need in oral, vocabulary and writing instruction to better develop written language skills. Students perform low in the writing component of the test. Books have been purchased to support writing and the school focus is on integrating writing in every subject area. Nysitell students were transitioning to expanding. We found that students had errors in retelling, speaking and sequencing. Read alouds, and a guided reading library are used to build vocabulary, oral and comprehension skills. In addition, the Reading Street curriculum has a daily component addressing the needs of Ells that works well with our diverse population. Guided reading, one on one and core instruction have demonstrated data leading to improved results. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Tuesday Inquiry Work conducted by teacher teams and supervisors review teacher data collection systems. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. School Leadership has a clear vision and high expectations for ell student achievement. Students’ progress is systematically monitored, our teachers know their students and their individual needs (ie. long term ells, newcomers, sife) and instruction is planned accordingly. Our teachers and administration share the philosophy that complex text aids in developing higher order thinking. Our language instruction is aligned with the grade level standards in which college readiness is the goal. The freestanding esl program for grades kindergarten though 5th is organized to include self-contained classes, as well as, push-in/pull out model. 0  b. TBE program. If applicable. There is one Transitional bilingual class at the Kindergarten level where Mrs. Vazquez provides CCLS instruction. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per CR Part 154 mandates, language support services are provided by certified teachers through the self-contained TBE model, self-contained Freestanding ESL model or the push-in ESL model. Teachers provide language instruction using ESL methodology during the 90 minute Reading Street literacy block. In order to address the five stages of language acquisition, ELLs are grouped according to proficiency level as determined by the LABR/NYESESLAT results. Students' proficiency levels determine the number of minutes of instruction as required by the CR Part 154 Regulations. In our ESL classrooms , ELA instruction is differentiated according to reading levels within the literacy block and throughout the flow of the day.Our Entering and Emerging (Stand Alone) students receive a minimum of 180 minutes English Language instruction and at least a minimum of 180 in ELA instruction. The majority of these students are in ESL classes. Students who are Entering and Emerging receive 180 minutes in ENL services by our Certified ESL teachers that either push-in/pull-out depending on grouping. Our Transitioning (Stand Alone or Integrated) students are provided with minimum 90 minutes of ENL and 90 minutes of ELA services. These students are either in their assigned ESL or Bilingual classroom or are provided with services by the ESL push-in /pull-out teachers. Our Expanding (Intergrated) students are provided with a minimum of either ENL/ELA, Science, Social Studies, or Math either in their assigned ESL classroom or provided with instruction by our ESL push- in teachers. Our Commanding ELLs (Integrated) are provided with 90 minutes of instruction ELA, Science, Social Studies or Math for two years. (2014-2015 Proficient Students) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. a. Our instructional programs provides ELLs with full exposure to a standards based core curriculum which is in direct alignment with that of mainstream English speaking students. Our Go Math, Social Studies and Science programs focus on the use of manipulatives which appeal to students’ individual learning styles. Teachers facilitate learning through the use of cognates, repetition, visual aids,shared reading and vocabulary infusion through our Vocabulary cluster Ms. Karalekas. b. In our ESL self-contained and push-in/pull out programs, language instruction is differentiated in order to best provide for the students’ language needs. The ESL teacher will provide support in the content areas through our push-in co-teaching model where he/she supports and scaffolds Tier I core instruction. Content area lessons are common core aligned and our ell students are immersed in this classroom structure. This program incorporates the use of SMART goals. Students are provided with extensive opportunities for oral language practice, vocabulary and syntax development. Content areas are presented with a focus on metacognition. Teachers facilitate learning differentiated planning/instruction in which use: realia, Smart board technology, repetition, visual aids,shared reading and vocabulary infusion. Exposure to high quality English language literature, plays and music in modern day technological classrooms help motivate students to attain language proficiency. Teachers of ells label objects in classroom (ie. chair, desk, clock ets). Additionally, classroom made charts and pictures with text are hung throughout the room as a reference. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, newly admitted students who are identified as ELLs with Spanish dominance on the HLIS are administered the Spanish LAB to determine fluency and literacy in their native language. Once these students have been appropriately placed, the classroom teachers/push-in teachers/SETTS and related services teachers use formal and informal formative assessments to drive instruction. Within the Tier I core instruction, teachers use informal assessments every 3 - 6 weeks to monitor progress with targeted students. 1  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Newcomers identified as ELLs are placed in a language program based on NYSITELL scores and parents' choice. These students receive CCLS aligned intensive English language instruction in both the TBE and ESL program model to enhance language acquisition. Scaffolds and ENL supports within the Reading Street program as well as additional resources such as Writing to source, grammar, phonics programs provide additional support. Studies show that children learn from listening to each other. Best practices allow for this interaction through collaborative group work. One of our instructional plans is the pairing of newcomers with English proficient speakers. ELL students with 4- 6 years of language service are identified using BESIS data, RYOS and RMNR ATS reports. These students are assessed and monitored via the teachers college just right reading level assessment, MOSL, Reading Street, ELL Periodic Assessment, ELA, Math, and Science State standardized exams. This information provides teachers with the data necessary to differentiate instruction. The ESL push-in teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher to ensure that the strategies being used are aligned with the core curriculum and students' goals. The ESL teacher provides language support through skill/strategy lessons, read alouds, guided reading and interactive reading and writing lessons. Long term ELLs receive additional support in our after school program for grades 3-5 which can include small group tutoring, inquiry target teams. Long Term ELLs who have completed more than six years, receive academic intervention with ESL, SETTS, speech, physical and/or occupational therapy, guidance, and inquiry team support. Former ELLs, specifically those who have tested proficient on the NYSESLAT in the past two years, continue receiving language in order to help them transition into the general education environment. Our Commanding ELLs (Integrated) are provided with 90 minutes of instruction ELA, Science, Social Studies or Math for two years. (2014-2015 Proficient Students). Students that are commanding are grouped according to reading level according Fountus and Pinel and Math grades in order to differentiate instruction. Time and a half accomodations for ELLS and former ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The IEP is used to determine the language goals for ELL-SWDs. All ELL-SWDs receive mandated services in the appropriate program. The classroom teacher/special ed teacher/SETTS provider meet during common preps to discuss IEP mandates and student progress. Students with disabilities whose IEP indicates a need for ESL service receive the mandated ESL/TBE instructional unit requirement based on their LAT or LABR score. ELL SWDs have access to all language programs used within our mainstream classrooms. Instructional strategies include scaffolding, higher level thinking, - Danielson's Framework for Teaching), vocabulary support by our cluster teacher with visuals for academic language proficiency.Reading Street, Writing to source, and additional instructional resources are used as a balance approach by all teachers (general and special ed) and allows for small group differentiated instruction, while at the same time enhancing the development of vocabulary and comprehension skills. Language support is provided through guided reading/text based conversation and peer collaboration during small group instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our mission is to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. This requires flexibility in rigorous curricular, instructional, and schedule planning. ELL-SWDs are exposed to the same academic learning environment. All ICT and 12:1 classes have prep periods with the same teachers and materials as the general ed students. Our prep schedule is designed in so that it accommodates collaborative planning time (once a week during common prep as well as during professional periods and PDs on Monday) within and across the grades. Curriculum teams attend grade appropriate professional development and then turnkey information to their collaboration. Scheduling enables collaboration between the classroom teacher, special education teachers and the push-in/pull out ESL teachers. ELLS-SWDs are afforded access to all school programs. ELL-SWDs are placed in the appropriate and least restrictive environment as mandated by their IEP. 2  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The goal of all intervention programs is to provide differentiated instruction in a small group setting where students are given a variety of opportunities for interaction among students to develop auditory, listening, and vocabulary skills around content. Active engagement and conversation about the content (making connections : text to self, text to text, etc) is encouraged and taught which allows students to build academic language and achieve higher levels of understanding of concepts taught. Our Curriculum is rigorous and level appropriate. The methods by which the standards based instruction is delivered differentiated and goal driven. Skills analysis sheets provided by our coaches: Ms. Ignatiadis and Ms. Palagian in both Math and Reading( NYS ELA and Math) results give teachers the ability to determine which common core standards needs to be addressed. Information provided by this data helps teachers across the grades to plan accordingly. Teachers analyze patterns (during inquiry) and discuss and plan for methods in which they can teach common core standards to ensure students are meeting goals for their grade level. There is communication and accoutability between our teachers across the grades. In order to address the ELL subgroup that did not make adequate progress on the 2015 ELA and Math State exams, intervention programs through differentiation tiers RTI will target these ELLs and provide reinforcement in content areas. Instructional strategies include using rigor through the direct skills taught during small group instruction, audio&visual prompts, tactile and kinesthetic methods of scaffolding according to each individuals learning styles, and higher level thinking questions. Go Math and all our instructional programs provide "hands-on" learning and tactile reinforcement of specific grade level concepts. All our programs are common core aligned and provide clear focus for all units taught. ELLs and ELL-SWDs benefit form the extra materials such as charts, and pictures integrated within the program. IEP is used to determines the language goals for this subgroup. Our ELL SWDs are afforded access to all literacy programs in our mainstream classrooms. Long-term ELLs who have remained at the advanced level on the NYSESLAT receive language support during Title III ESL after school. Emphasis is given on reinforcing writing conventions. The additional Writing to Source book may be used. Teachers meet regularly with students to provide differentiated instruction and to determine and assess goals for each student. ELL students who have been evaluated by our SBST and whose IEP indicates Spanish receive SETTS and related services in their native language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have an instructional focus on writing and the principal has purchased a supplemental Writing To Source book, Sadlier vocabulary workshop, grammar and vocabulary workbook. Our title 3 after school program will also have new CCLS ENL materials to support students grades3-5 who are in after school. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Teachers are supported by our coaches: Betty Ignatiadis and Maria Palagian to efficiently differentiate instruction using the instructional materials by referring to to the ENL components found within the Reading Street and GO Math programs which provide targetted instruction. Tier 2 intervention: small groups, literature circles, UDL methods, etc are offered to ELLS in our school. ESL after school program is available for grades 3-5. Invitations with tear-offs are sent home in the homework folder. The principal and assistant principals work with the ESL coordinator, classroom teachers and parent coordinator to ensure all ELL students are accounted for and placed properly. Parents are notified in writing of the commencement dates and schedule of these programs. Attendance is taken daily to ensure full participation and representation of ELLs in all programs. The program provides test taking strategies to promote success and address annual measurable achievement objectives (AMAO). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 3  Smartboard training and Promethean training has given teachers the opportunity to utilize technology in the classroom to be used as an additional support. Also, ipads are available to support language acquisition and increase exposure to technology. Newcomers receive language support from our listening centers. Additional materials include realia (manipulatives to enable students to make connections with environment), charts, picture graphs, vocabulary pictures, venn diagrams, etc. Students' language acquisition skills are assessed early on and they are then grouped based on the results. The phonics program provides practice with the phonetic and syntactic aspects of the English language. In addition to curriculum materials mentioned in the section above, language instructional materials used as supplement may include Fundations to be used by staff who is trained. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support for our ELL students in TBE and ESL programs is provided through labelled classrooms, bilingual word walls, Learn through the arts (music program), multicultural libraries (classroom and school library). We are in the process of opening an additional early elementary library for our K-2 students. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Support services and schedules are arranged to encourage collaboration between teachers. Prep schedules are carefully planned for each service provider to ensure that all required services, resources and supports are provided to ELLs according to proficiency and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Smartboard training and Promethean training has given teachers the opportunity to utilize technology in the classroom to be used as an additional support. Also, ipads are available to support language acquisition and increase exposure to technology. Newcomers receive language support from our listening centers. Additional materials include realia (manipulatives to enable students to make connections with environment), charts, picture graphs, vocabulary pictures, venn diagrams, etc. Students' language acquisition skills are assessed early on and they are then grouped based on the results. The phonics program provides practice with the phonetic and syntactic aspects of the English language. In addition to curriculum materials mentioned in the section above, language instructional materials used as supplement may include Fundations to be used by staff who is trained. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students and parents are encouraged to attend orientation at our school prior to the start of the academic year. Activities include a school tour, webinar, a teacher meet and greet where educators and all support staff review curriculum (textbooks) that will be used throughout the school year and supplies. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Art, Music, Movement. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 4  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL personnel and all staff members who are involved with the education of our ELLs participate in our school's professional development that is geared for ELLs. All staff is always encouraged to watch webinars and attend workshops. Professional development workshops are provided by our literacy coach, math coach, assistant principal, principal, guidance counselor (Theresa Rotondi), psychologist (Maria Giannakoulis), speech therapist (Mrs. Digenakis), parent coordinator (Maria Hernandez), etc. There is an annual calendar with all PD dates included which are every Mondays from 2:30p.m. till 3:50p.m. and certain Tuesdays 3:10p.m. till 3:45p.m. Past and future pds address the Common Core instructional shifts as well as the instructional focus of writing for our school. Round table Monday is also an opportunity for parent association to participate in a professional development plan for parents which also has monthly workshops. Teachers and administration personnel attend the professional development workshops that consist of Implementing A Response To Intervention Model To Support ELLs' Academic Achievement and The Common Core Standards/Focus on Danielson). All staff such as related services providers and paraprofessionals attend workshops throughout the school year. Workshop attendees are encouraged to turnkey important information to their colleagues during common preps and during the pds in each individual assigned grade/classroom found in our handbook. Our school's handbook as well as principals notes offer a multitude of resources that reflect the professional development plan. Additional PD will focus on using an interdisciplinary approach to collect, analyze and use the data analysis sheets provided by the coaches to drive instruction and differentiating instruction for ELL subgroups in all curriculum areas. Implementing SMART (specific, measurable, achievable, results-focused, and time-bound) goals within each classroom wil be an ongoing plan for all teachers. Teachers who require ELL training receive professional development with staff developers from our network, as well as, the ESL coordinator and literacy coach to ensure they receive the mandated hours of ELL PD. During our Monday Professional period teachers of ELLs attend professional development workshops at PS70 geared towards ELLs. Teachers are supported in the collection and analysis of data in so that the findings are used towards the implementation of the common core standards through differentiation instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. N/A Here at PS70 we meet the professional development requirements through professional learning workshops on Mondays. The pd is provided by the department of education as well as from our staff who attend outside pds who turn key valuable information to all staff as well as the necessary 50% for bilingual education/ENL teachers who receive ELL-specific professional development. Teachers of ELLs are also encouraged to attend viewing of webinars from sites such as (WETEACH) and other doe sites. These viewing are available in the ESL classroom, room 402. The differentiated professional development will take place every Monday after the instructional day and on Tuesdays following the Parent Engagement sessions. We are in the process of planning and initiating differentiation and RTI's Professional Developments where teachers will plan using ENL best practices. Principals and Assistant Principals participate in webinars and regional conferences and then turn key to the faculty. The Library Media Teacher provides information to staff on possible library resources for teachers and students. The IEP teacher meets with Special Education and ICT teachers to provide SESSIS trainings. ESL Teachers meet with supervisors of ESL to review new practices. Attendance and agendas for each pd is kept in the main office. 5  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are an integral part of our school community. Several Parent Orientation Sessions are held during the year for newly enrolled ELL parents, as well as an informative session in early Spring, providing parents with information on NYSESLAT testing. The ENL orientation is twice a year, parental involvement calendar contains all formal face to face meetings/involvement dates. There are always additional informal calls and meetings because the school collaborates and accommodates parents so that all stakeholders are actively involved in ENL students education. Pamphlets and mock tests are distributed to parents to work with their children at home, as well as an informative measure to introduce them to what their children have been working on and what will be expected of them during this assessment. In addition, all parents are invited to attend workshops on ELA and Math state exams. Parents and the school principal meet once a month. They are invited to have an informal conversation with her and the parent coordinator about parent needs and concerns such as academics and curriculum. These discussions help build a stronger partnership and between the school and home, and maintain communication between school staff and parents. See parent translation policy and Language translation and Interpretation plan. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental involvement is valued at our school. There is a parental involvement calendar that goes out in the beginning of the year where parents are encouraged to refer to and attend the wide range of valuable and supportive workshops that are hosted at the school in addition to Tuesdays parental engagement that takes place every Tuesday starting at 2:30pm-3:10pm. We have grade specific workshops during the day such as pre-k workshops, E.S.L. parent orientation (going through the LAB/NYSESLAT) and support, family book of the month club, reading workshops that encourage and teach parents how to support students in acquiring skills such as drawing conclusions, main ideas/details, math workshops, parents as learning partners workshops, etc. Translators are always available and accessible during our workshops. Our parent coordinator Maria Hernandez is available during school hours. The coordinator is always ensuring that there is constant parental involvement and representation in our school. School leadership is provided with valuable input by our parent coordinator regarding parental input on the quality and availability of services; improving school and community/parent involvement (representation) is a constantly addressed. Furthermore, parent surveys are sent home and responses are encouraged and valued. There are in house translators as well as telephone translation services are commonly used in our school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. PS 70s School leadership has a clear school vision that includes high expectations for ELL student achievement that is supported by a purposeful plan of action. Teachers with support from our coaches and supervisors, are continuously monitoring ELL student progress and systematically adjust instructional planning based on the wide variety of evidence and data. Teachers and school leadership know their ELL population and their individual needs well. At 70, organization and structure is maximized for ample collaboration and planning time among teachers, school leadership, and all stakeholders. Teachers support and learn from each other in a way that recognizes the interdependency of language proficiency and content instruction. Curriculum and instruction at the school are closely aligned to applicable standards. The school highly values parent and community involvement, and takes active steps to ensure that both are a part of the school’s culture. 6  7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Donna Geller, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: 70Q Superintendent: Dr. Composto DBN: 30Q070 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Elizabeth Apostolidis ENL coordinator Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As per the language access plan and in accordance with Chancellor's Regulation A-663, PS70Q ensures that all parents are given a meaningful opportunity for learning. Parents have access to workshops, monthly parent letters, a parent handbook, and afterschool language programs, are given as opportunities and services that are critical to support their child’s education. Data is collected regarding the primary language spoken by the parent of each child enrolled in the school through the parent language survey . Parent information as to whether language assistance is needed to communicate with the school or the DOE is provided through translators. Methodologies include and are not limited to: parent surveys that are distributed in the beginning of the year, home language surveys, ATS report/RHLA, emergency blue cards where parents indicate preferred oral as well as written language. In 51 languages the word welcome is engraved in the tile of the building. 0  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE ANY CROATIAN DARI/FARSI/PERSIAN FRENCH GREEK HINDI JAPANESE KOREAN MACEDONIAN MANDARIN ENGLISH PASHTO PUNJABI POLISH PORTUGUESE ROMANIAN RUSSIAN SENUFO 7 123 40 4 2 6 1 8 2 1 2 2 0 0.5 6 8.77 128 2.85 39 0.29 0.14 0.43 0.07 0.57 0.14 0.07 0.14 0.14 0 2 2 6 1 8 2 1 2 2 2 0.43 9.12 2.78 0.14 0.14 0.43 0.07 0.57 0.14 0.07 0.14 0.14 0.14 767 54.67 761 54.24 6 5 2 0.43 0.36 0.14 6 5 3 15 1.07 15 2 2 1 0.14 0.14 0.07 2 1 1 0.43 0.36 0.21 1.07 0.14 0.07 0.07 1  SERBIAN SPANISH URDU UKRAINIAN VIETNAMESE 4 349 48 2 2 0.29 4 24.88 350 3.42 50 0.14 0.14 2 2 0.29 24.95 3.56 0.14 0.14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Principal's monthly letters to the parents; Parent teacher conference letters, Parent Association meeting handouts, parent workshops flyers, report cards, school/after school announcements and New York testing dates; as translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents translated by NYC DOE Translation Unit one to two week turn around. Staff members who speak the top most common languages of the building readily Our school Parent Handbook created by the Principal and the PS 70 school calendar of daily events scheduled for every day of the entire year is distributed to parents. Both the Parent Handbook and the Annual School Calendar which include pertinent information are translated by the translation and Interpretation unit during the beginning of the year. 2  available to meet and assist parents with completing documents in home language. required by the Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 language services are in the nine most common languages other than English spoken by parents which based on the DOE’s Home Language Identification Survey these languages are Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu . 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings There is an ENL orientation twice a year, parent teacher conferences, weekly parental engagement (Tuesdays), monthly "Parents as learning partners" workshops, etc. Furthermore, there is a parental involvement calendar that is distributed that contains all formal face to face meetings/involvement dates, swd (IEP) meetings. Weekly parental engagement meetings, monthly Parent read aloud/learning partners and individual class parental activities. Furthermore,additional informal calls and meetings occur here at PS70 because the school collaborates and accomodates parents so that all school stakeholders are actively involved in How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? All parents are provided interpretation services, by the school(staff members) or by telephone, to the maximum extent practicable, during regular business hours: for parents whose primary 3  the education of our students. language is a covered language and who request such services in order to communicate regarding critical information about their child’s education. Language posters posted at entrance, signs are posted including welcome, Google translate, etc. As per the service provisional plan, over-the-phone interpretation services are available during regular business hours in over 150 languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Robo call is used to communicate in the event of a school emergency. Staff members translate in the home languages as indicated in the RCPL. 4  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional development calendar for the year indicates expectations, standards and chancellor's regulations informing. Staff members are aware and informed of language access requirements and resources. An array of resources are shared in depth: Computer applications, letters, Translation devices, technology, etc. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the primary entrance of the school parents have access to the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in the English, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Spanish, Urdu.There is also a sign on display which can easily be seen ( provided by the ofea) in which the covered languages, indicating availability of interpretation services are noted. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Principal attends Parent Association Meetings addressing parent concerns and sharing news for the upcoming month. The Principal hosts a Round Table with the Principal on Monday afternoons for any parent who wishes to walk in and discuss any concerns. We have a parent coordinator who is available during school hours who ensures that consistent parental involvement and representation is present at our school. School leadership addresses valuable input by the parent coordinator regarding parental input on the quality and availability of services; improving school and community/parent involvement . Parent represenation of all cultures of the PS 70 community is a constantly addressed priority of the Principal. Furthermore, parent surveys are sent home and responses are encouraged and valued. 5 
