 26Q074 School Name: J.H.S. 074 NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE Principal: ANTHONY ARMSTRONG   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Nathaniel Hawthorne Middle School 26Q074 342600010074 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 61-15 Oceania Street, Oakland Gardens, NY 11364 718-631-6800 Phone Number: 718-631-6899 Fax: Anthony M. Armstrong aarmstrong@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Anthony M. Armstrong Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: YaniraFanerte Cathy Grodsky Anthony M. Armstrong N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 26 Superintendent’s Office Address: Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Oakland Gardens, NY 11364 DGiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-631-6943 Phone Number: 718-631-6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Boulevard, LIC, NY 11101 LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-391-8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Catherine Smar Irene Papamichael Patricia Scollo Teacher Teacher Teacher  Name Anthony M. Armstrong YaniraFanerte Cathy Grodsky N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jean Posada Paul DeSimone ShannaBurroughs Maria Antzoulis Elizabeth Cano-Correa Denise T. Grant Melissa Nissen Theresa Wong Teacher Assistant Principal Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Nathaniel Hawthorne Middle School 74 Mission Statement : Section 4: CEP Overview A nurturing environment for children where we:   Encourage a love of learning Inspire children to explore, achieve and excel Foster high self-esteem Appreciate cultural diversity Encourage respect and responsibility to self and others Instill a concern for the world around us Develop an appreciation of the arts. It is our belief that students learn best in an environment that recognizes their interests, readiness and learning styles. TEAM74 Instructional Focus: “Student Engagement ” Theory of Action “ If we continue to cultivate the knowledge and skill of ALL teachers, while collectively facilitating 21st Century Skills (Oral Communication and Media/Informational Literacy), and continue to integrate strategic professional development regarding: “ data driven instruction ”, “ multiple entry points ”, “ questioning and discussion techniques ” and "checks for understanding" 0  the teachers will continue to be able to construct rigorous performance tasks and assessments embedded in Next Generation aligned units of study that reflect student diversity, thus student engagement and learning will continue to improve as a result of engaging in such tasks .” This is the work that will promote equity, allowing all students to become college and career ready, as we continue to soar, from good to Great and BEYOND ! 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Nathaniel Hawthorne Middle School, established in 1954, has a history of demonstrating “excellence in education”. Our diverse population includes 1180 students from 6 th grade through 8 th grade, comprised of 5% Black, 10% Hispanic, 20% White and 65% Asian. We collaboratively work to maintain high standards of excellence, in ALL areas of our school, ( academics, arts, social and emotional ) for ALL members of TEAM74 ; students, staff and families. We have embraced two core beliefs to guide our collaborative efforts: T ogether E veryone A chieves M ore , as we continue to soar from good to Great and BEYOND ! These two components are at the nucleus of our belief system and are ingrained in all areas of our school. During our most recent Quality Review, the work of our teacher teams was an area of celebration. This reflects a strong willingness by our teachers to work collaboratively to plan to and meet the needs of ALL students. We will continue to work to engage all students through the utilization of multiple entry points and the differentiation of the process, product, or content within a lesson. Respect For All (RFA) is also a unique component within TEAM74 , as it is a part of our school culture, in thought, word and deed; it is connected to our school mission, philosophy, initiatives and intertwined within our daily work, all year long. Our RFA Class Representatives assist our Dean to provide a safe and nurturing environment, in addition to other systems in place, our (S.O. /SGA) Student Organization/Student Government Association, Student 1  Cabinets and our Peer Mediation Program. These school day initiatives have successfully provided student feedback and structures that have positively impacted the culture of TEAM74 . As a federally recognized ARTs Achieve school, we are proud to provide a rigorous course of instruction within ALL ARTS forums: dance, graphic art & design, studio art, moving image, theatre, instrumental and vocal music . Our differentiated approach allows our students to self-select a major ARTs focus, based upon interest and choice; hence all students receive a three year sequence complemented by a second ARTs class to support their ARTs learning. Each ARTs program collaborates with diverse cultural organizations within New York City, to provide both field experiences and enriched ARTs experiences that are aligned with the NYC Arts Blueprint, for Teaching and Learning. This includes partnerships with the following: City Center, Flushing Town Hall, Jose . College and Career readiness is another major focus within TEAM74 highlighted by our 7th grade work with College Access For All. For example, family and student workshops focusing on how to prepare for college, as well as tours to local college campuses to ensure that all students are well informed. We maintain a unified lens toward BEYOND, in order to prepare ALL students to progress and achieve, by facilitating learning using our instructional focus of STUDENT ENGAGEMENT. Our “Theory of Action ” provides an aligned focus toward college and career readiness components, thus allowing all members of TEAM74 to become empowered to reach future successes BEYOND TEAM74 . Our annual Career Day celebrates this belief. It is another collaborative initiative that allows staff, students and parents to provide a culminating full day of immersion into potential careers based upon student interest. This initiative involves all subjects and departments and it also includes our school-wide partnerships with the Urban Advantage Cultural Science Organizations, Saint Francis College, NYCDOE Office of School Wellness, alumni and our long term PENCIL “Principal for a Day ” from Merrill Lynch/Bank of America. These initiatives and beliefs, plus our ongoing partnerships help to maintain our status as a “shining jewel ” within the community of Oakland Gardens, Queens, New York City and New York State. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body includes ENL (English as a New Language) students (8%) and students receiving special education services (15%), in addition to gifted & talented (10%). This diversity is both our strength and a challenge, as we collaboratively strive to meet the needs of ALL students. Some specific needs include students struggling to cite textual evidence and multi-step word problems. TEAMs have been created to provide “Excellence for ALL”. This initiative focuses on articulated subject congruence to improve achievement for our English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities, as well as our high performing students, by creating a (PLC) Professional Learning Community that supports ongoing inquiry of shared Best Practices for Teaching and Learning. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Nathaniel Hawthorne Middle School 74 made the most progress over the past year in the element of strong family-community ties. Middle School 74 focused on ensuring that our parent engagement time on Tuesdays is well utilized by all teachers. Our online communication system (Skedula), ensures that all families are well-informed of their children's academic progress and attendance. Parents can also use this system to send messages to teachers and 2  schedule meetings with them. We offer regular family workshops throughout the year on topics including transitioning to middle school, social-emotional learning, high school application process, etc. The key area for focus for this school year will be in the area of rigorous instruction. Specifically highlighting our students' knowledge of "21st Century Skills" and how our students can improve on those skills for college and career readiness. We believe that by focusing on specific "21st Century Skills", such as media and informational literacy, our students can move from good, to great, and BEYOND! 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q074 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1160 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 51 49 18 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 34 31 12 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 48.0% % Attendance Rate 40.2% % Reduced Lunch 7.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 10.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 17.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 74.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 83 84 6 97.4% 8.0% 13.2% 4.3% 66.5% 1.1% 8 32% 6.7 75.1% 80% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES N/A YES YES NO YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Our school’s strengths include creating interesting and challenging curriculum, assessing student learning, and functioning teacher teams as indicated in the Area of Celebration, receiving a well-developed rating on the 2016 – 2017 Quality Review Report. According to the 2017 Framework for Great Schools report, teachers are exceeding both the district and city averages of working collaboratively, receiving a score of 4.47 out 4.99. The same report indicates our students exceeding target for achievement with a score of ___ out of 4.99.  74% of students are at a level of 3 or 4 as indicated by the 2018 NYS ELA exam.  75% of students are at a level of 3 or 4 as indicated by the 2018 NYS Math exam.  According to trends from looking at the Item Skills Analysis of state exam data, students struggle with questions which demand an explanation of their analysis or of their thinking.  The 2017 Framework for Great Schools indicates a score of 4.21 out of 4.9 for Rigorous Instruction (meeting target).  Our school's priority need is centered around feedback. The 2018 NYC School Survey indicates 62% of students who say that teachers give them specific suggestions about how to improve their work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of students will perform at a level of 3 or 4 on the ELA exam and 76% of students will perform at a level of 3 or 4 on the Math exam, as measured by the NYS exams in the Spring of 2019. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers across all subjects Strategies will be developed and implemented to address the needs of students with disabilities, students learning a new language (ENL students) and other high-need student sub-groups to achieve success on performance tasks by every teacher in the building conducting a plan of action for an identified student from one of these groups. The plans demand that teachers design and implement strategies for students in these groups and that student progress will be monitored. Also, the information learned from these studies will be shared periodically in teacher team meetings so that the strategies will be used throughout departments and grades. Staff Developer, ENL Teachers, All Content Teachers, All Supervisors, Principal Students identified: October 2018 Midyear Check in: January 2019 Reflection: May/June 2019 Teacher Ambassadors will lead teacher teams through cycles of reflecting upon units of study that are Next Generation-aligned and include rigorous performance tasks which will yield in students actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and development of critical thinking skills. This will serve as a benchmark by allowing teachers to take a pulse of instruction and student understanding so that they can customize tasks to ensure student achievement on state exams. Differentiated professional development will be provided to assist teachers in utilizing formative assessment in order to provide beneficial feedback for student understanding. Teachers will examine and evaluate forms of feedback as a department in order to assess their own quality of feedback used in their practice. Teachers will plan ways to give feedback with next steps which will be given during teacher to student conferences and student to student conferences, both individually and in a group setting. All Teachers Weekly, September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer, Teachers All Teachers Weekly, September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer, Teachers 6 Teacher examination of student work that results from the implementation of rigorous Next Generation-aligned performance tasks and their rubrics will be analyzed at teacher team meetings for progress monitoring prior to mid-winter recess. While analyzing student work, teachers will collaborate to come up with next steps for their students in order to make sufficient progress. All Teachers September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer, Ambassadors, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be notified throughout the school year by our Parent Coordinator and classroom teachers about what students are doing and responsible for in each of their classes through the use of SKEDULA updates. Parents will be invited to our annual Back to School Night in September to learn about the curriculum and expectations in each area of study. Parents will have the opportunity to discuss students' progress with respect to the above during our weekly family engagement time on Tuesday afternoons as well as at student-led Parent Teacher Conferences in the Fall and Spring (scheduled through an online scheduler). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Master schedule programming to allow for common planning time Funding for a Staff Developer Staff copies of How Teachers Can Turn Data Into Action , by Daniel Venables Monday Professional Development Conversations Tuesday Teacher Team Meetings BFSC Professional Development: Data-Specialist, Rubicon Atlas Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of all students across grades 6-8 will achieve on grade level as evidenced by the winter diagnostic administered through iReady in ELA and Math. 7  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers will analyze diagnostic data using the iReady program in ELA and Math in the fall. A second round is administered in the late winter and teachers will identify areas of focus for their individual students. Inquiry teams will review student performance and teacher feedback on standards-aligned performance tasks. Teacher feedback in observations will be anchored to feedback on formative assessment. Teachers will administer embedded tasks throughout each unit to gauge student mastery. Teacher teams will utilize a Measures of Impact Protocol to track growth and progress connecting teacher feedback to student performance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on the data from our learning environment survey with regards to school culture, our most recent Quality Review, current student cabinets, Student Organization, and RFA Liaisons, students at TEAM74 feel safe and supported both in and around the school building. MS 74 received a 3.93 in the framework element of supportive environment, which exceeds both district and city averages. The work of our teachers, students, guidance counselors, social worker, psychologist, Dean and administration is centered on the belief that all middle school children can be successful when supported by a trusting environment that allows students to thrive in a challenging yet rewarding school setting. There is also the belief that all students should engage in rigorous common core aligned instruction that is geared towards our school goals and college and career readiness. Our major priority need for this school year would be that every student at TEAM74 have at least one staff member that they can trust and feel supported by. In the 2017-18 school survey, 45% of students reported that their teachers support them when they're upset. We can ensure the success of our students by learning more about who they are as individuals and making sure that they know that they are cared for. In 2017-18, we addressed this goal by the addition of Emotional Intelligence training for the staff, a SAPIS worker and an Asian Outreach Counselor. In 2018-19, we are participating in the just say hi initiative, incorporating the three signature SEL strategies via Monday afternoon PD time, and focusing on feedback in our grade cabinet meetings. In this way, we will better be able to ensure that each student in the building has someone they can be supported by. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, TEAM74 will increase from 90% to having 93% of our students feeling comfortable going to at least one staff member that they can trust and be supported by as measured by the school survey. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). RFA liaisons from each class will meet on a monthly basis and discuss ways to encourage students and staff to treat people respectfully. The program runs from September to June and is overseen by the Dean. The RFA liaisons spearhead a mission to have a school signing of our “Champions of Respect Oath” and complete a school wide project to promote "Respect" throughout the school year. Homeroom teachers will hold weekly conversations with students in their homeroom to discuss concerns and areas of support. Students will be able to ask questions about all areas that they believe they need more support in at TEAM74. This will allow students to gain trust and support to meet their needs, while engaging in an atmosphere of mutual respect. Homeroom teachers will bring concerns for support to the Dean and the RFA liaisons. In addition, grade AP's will meet with students monthly and/or as needed to hear student voice. Through post observation conversations and strategic professional development focused around Social Emotional Learning, teachers will be given strategies from Quantum Learning and Emotional Intelligence training to create more supportive environments in their classrooms. School events (such as Back to School Night, Parent Teacher Conferences, Science and Art Expos, Music and Dance Performances, S.O. Family Nights, sporting events, etc.) will be used as an opportunity to introduce families to the various stakeholders within our building that students can turn to for support. Friends of Rachel will be used again this year in collaboration with Uncommon Athlete. We will continue to use PupilPath as a way to communicate to families about these events and to gather their input. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ALL students, grades 6 through 8 September 2018 – June 2019 and BEYOND Administration, RFA Liaisons, Dean, CST members ALL students, grades 6 through 8 September 2018 – June 2019 and BEYOND Administration, Homeroom Teachers, Peer Mediation Advisors, Student Peer Mediators ALL Staff Members September 2018 – June 2019 and BEYOND Administration, Staff Members ALL Families September 2018 – June 2019 and BEYOND Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers and (CST) Child Support Team, all other support staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 0  The school has a number of ways to which we engage families including phone messenger, mass email, parent coordinator contacts and a school website. In addition, we have many community-wide events throughout the year including Uncommon Athlete, Lunar New Year Celebration, The Brain Show etc. Our PTA also works with families and the school to encourage greater support systems. The timeline is September 2018-June 2019 and BEYOND. Key Personnel include Principal, Asst Principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator, CST, PTA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Master schedule programming to allow for common planning time Funding for a Staff Developer Staff copies of What Every Middle School Teacher Should Know , by Brown & Knowles Monday Professional Development Conversations Tuesday Teacher Team Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By November 2018, grade cabinets will develop a survey tool to assess how supportive the school environment is and administer it to each grade. By January 2019, school administration will analyze and reflect on this survey data in addition to feedback from student organization, RFA liaisons, parent feedback through Pupil Path and classroom observations. Trends will inform progress with respect to this goal. Our baseline is 90% and our goal is 93%, so we hope to meet it at 91% for January, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As evidenced by conversation and feedback from student cabinets, class charters, student organization, RFA liaisons, parent feedback through Pupil Path and classroom observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths According to our school’s last Quality Review Report (2016), indicator 4.2, our teacher teams were rated 4.99 (well developed) for the following  Teacher teams engage in collaborative inquiry that supports goals and strengthens teacher capacity   Embedded distributed leadership structures that influence key decisions Student work/data analysis within teams improves curricula, teaching and learning Through the use of “Ambassadors” (lead teachers from each department who meet with administration to discuss goals and facilitate said goals with their teacher teams) 94% of our teachers feel that they work together to design instructional programs, 89% of our teachers feel that they have the opportunity to work productively with their colleagues and feel responsible that all students learn according to the latest School Quality Snapshot (2016). Our teacher team collaboration strengthens the impact on the design of coherent instruction. With teachers working collaboratively to conduct inquiry, share best practices, measure the impact of their practices on student achievement/teacher growth, and strengthen curriculum, Advance reports indicate 28% of teachers receiving a rating of highly effective for component 1e, designing coherent instruction during the 2017-18 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 30% of our teachers will receive highly effective ratings in Component 1E as evidenced by teacher observation reports through Advance. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based professional development including use of pedagogical book studies, WeTeach, CCLS, Engage NY, ASCD publications, Framework for Great Schools, the Learning Environment Survey, and the school’s Report Card and the Quality Review Report. Teacher Teams, through use of protocols, will analyze data, study student work, create, implement and evaluate aligned tasks and assessments and meet to share findings and best practices both horizontally and vertically in order to revise and refine curriculum. Teachers perform Instructional Rounds, inter-visitations, learning walks and lesson studies as well. Using the findings from Teacher Team meetings, teachers will meet with parents during parent/teacher conferences to discuss the next steps for each student and how those next steps are being used in the classroom. Teachers will meet with colleagues to discuss qualitative and quantitative data in order to share knowledge of students in preparation for yearlong family engagement activities. Teachers will have a stronger understanding of their students' strengths and weaknesses which they will use to individually identify one student (ENL, SWD, lowest third, on track and accelerated) for a case study to implement new strategies and to track progress. As the conversation continues throughout the school year, the impact of these sub-school conversations will result in collective teacher growth and overall student achievement as measured through the Goal Setting and Progress Monitoring Teacher digital worksheet and ongoing department/grade teacher team debriefs. Teachers will attend Queens North Borough Field Support Center professional development sessions and turn key to staff. They will also engage in strategic, purposeful professional development to learn, share, and implement strategies to increase strong instruction as observable and measurable by Danielson related goals, feedback, and reflections on TeachBoost, and to reach student achievement as measurable by targeted students for each group every five weeks through use of the school wide classwork rubric, short constructed response Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Ambassadors, Staff Developer, Teachers All Teachers/ Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Parents Administration, Ambassadors, Staff Developer, Teachers, Parents All Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Ambassadors, Staff Developer, Administration Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Staff Developer, Ambassadors, Teachers 3 rubric, teacher created tasks and the Measures of Impact protocol. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In collaboration with our School Leadership Team, Ambassadors and the Parent Teacher Association, teacher-parent engagement in regard to collaborative teachers and strategies will be fostered by holding open forum meetings in which current teaching practices will be shared and modeled for parents. These sessions will be open to feedback and to answer questions. Sessions will take place in November and March with the key personnel responsible being the staff developer, parent coordinator, and the Parent Teacher Association president. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Master schedule programming to allow for common planning time Funding for a Staff Developer Coverages for teachers attending professional development Staff copies of How Teachers Can Turn Data Into Action, by Daniel Venables Staff copies of Authentic Learning in the Digital Age: Engaging Students Through Inquiry by Larissa Pahomov Access to Technology and Internet Ambassador Team and use of protocols Monday Professional Development Conversations Tuesday Teacher Team Meetings Tuesday Family Engagement Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, the average teacher rating for component 1e, designing coherent instruction, in Advance should be 29% highly effective. At the same time, teacher reflections, observation of teacher teams by administration, feedback 4  from Ambassadors, and evidence in classroom practice and student work will demonstrate that we are meeting our goal. As of January 2019, 25% of our teachers are highly effective for component 1e. Our plan is to target specific teachers who have a rating of 3.33 in component 1e as evidence by our TeachBoost Heat Map. These target teachers will work with assistant principals and the staff developer to learn strategies on designing coherent instruction. In addition, these target teachers will be provided opportunities for professional growth through professional development. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As evidenced by Danielson ratings on classroom observations for competency 1e, teacher reflections, observation of teacher teams by administration, feedback from Ambassadors, classroom observations, student work and information gathered and shared during Measure of Impact protocols in teacher teams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One of the Leadership Competencies, Personal Leadership, is a driving force behind everything that I do; it is my belief that I must model the expectations that are presented to TEAM74 ; lead by example. Using diverse forms of data that provide feedback to guide the schools mission to bring TEAM74 to BEYOND allow all of us to grow and evolve. -Rating of 1.2 on past Quality Review- need to provide multiple opportunities for meaningful engagement for all levels of learners -15% of ratings of component 3c during the 2016-17 school year was highly effective. -Student Progress is a focus area of the School Quality Report including the progress of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities in ELA and Math -Distributive leadership is demonstrated through the Staff Developer and the Teacher Team Ambassador structure- they assist with the professional development opportunities provided for their colleagues -The vast majority of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the Principal communicates a clear vision for the school as shown on last year’s School Survey. This vision includes doing what is needed to increase student engagement in order to increase student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of professional development centered on research-based strategies to improve in these areas, there will be an increase in student engagement, as evidenced through observations, 21% of teacher ratings in component 3c for the 2018-2019 school year being highly effective. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Staff members will participate in professional development centered around various current professional articles dealing with 21st century skills (i.e. oral communication and media and information literacy). The staff will make connections of their teaching practices and the research-based examples presented in these articles. In addition, staff members will write reflections demonstrating their understanding of the principles discussed and how these principles can help them increase student engagement, as aligned with our Instructional Focus and Theory of Action. Teachers, Paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff Developer, and Teacher Team Ambassadors A needs assessment regarding professional development was created and issued to all staff members. Data was analyzed and activities were tailored to the needs of the staff. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administrative team members participate in book studies with the staff developer and members of the teacher staff involving topics including important things every middle school teacher should know and data-driven instruction, with a specific focus on increasing student engagement. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers and paraprofessionals will participate in professional development opportunities designed to build capacity with incorporating 21st century skills into units of study, with the goal of increasing student engagement. Teachers, Paraprofessionals September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and staff members attend professional development opportunities focusing on ways to increase student engagement facilitated by the district, BFSC, and outside organizations. Information gathered will be shared in various ways with other staff members. Administration, Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Staff Developer, and Teacher Team Ambassadors Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer, and members of the teaching staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer, and members of the teaching staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Staff Developer, and members of the teaching staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 7  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be notified throughout each marking period of the school year of what students are doing and responsible for in each of their classes through the use of SKEDULA updates. Our parent coordinator shares these regularly with the entire community, and individual teachers follow up with the families of their students as well. Parents were invited to our annual Back to School Night in September and will have the opportunity to discuss students' progress with respect to the above at Parent Teacher Conferences in the Fall and Spring (scheduled through an online scheduler). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Staff Developer -Teacher Team Ambassadors and Meetings, including Monday Conversations -Utilization of Tuesday Inquiry time -Books and/or professional articles for staff members part of book studies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, additional needs assessments will be administered and completed by staff in order to determine if professional development activities are meeting the needs of the staff to determine needed adjustments, at this point in the year. Also, new needs identified by this assessment can be incorporated into future professional development activities. A minimum of 15% of ratings in competency 3c should be highly effective by this point. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Results from additional needs assessments, analysis of ADVANCE observation reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths - According to the 2017-2018 School Survey Report, over 87% of parents agree or strongly agree with the fact that our school does the following: School staff tell families what the staff needs to advance the school's mission.   Parents/guardians are invited to visit classrooms to observe instruction.  Parents/guardians are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school.  Teachers work closely with families to meet students' needs.  Teachers communicate regularly with parents/guardians.  School staff encourage feedback from parents/guardians and the community. Priority needs to be addressed - According to the 2017-2018 School Survey Report, 73% of parents indicated that they were invited to volunteer time to support this school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all parents will be invited to attend all school events (Parent/Teacher Conferences, Concerts, Trips, Volunteering, etc.) as measured by 78% of parents indicating as such on the 2018-2019 School Survey Report. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents and students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator All parents and students September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator All parents and students September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Parent Coordinator. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All communication with school community regarding school events will emphasize how the event is helping to create well-rounded students (academically, emotionally, and socially) within our school community. All parents will be notified about opportunities to volunteer for school events through school messenger, backpack letter, school website, and Facebook page. Communication during events will also take place via Twitter. Some specific school events that all parents are invited and urged to attend are Open School Week (Week of 11/16), Family Fitness Night (Spring 2019), Family Fun Night (Spring 2019). An online scheduling system for student led conferences has been implemented, which maximizes parent involvement. Tuesday afternoons throughout the school year have been allotted for parents and students to come and meet with their child's teachers to provide more flexibility for the parents in the community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Brain Show, Online Parent Conference Scheduler, Family Fitness Night, ARTS Department Celebratory Events, Science Innovation Night (Hall of Science/Queens Botanical Gardens), School-wide GS Challenge. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday Conversations, Supervisory Inquiry, Extended Cabinet Meetings, Master Program/Common Planning, Parent Coordinator Budget Line, Parent Engagement Opportunities (PTA meetings, Tuesday afternoon time, morning meetings, Back to School Night, and other Parent-Teacher Conferences) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 0  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, a mid-year survey will be sent to parents through Google Forms which will indicate 60% of parents acknowledging that they have been invited to attend at least 2 school events (Parent/Teacher Conferences, Concerts, Trips, Volunteering, etc.) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. As evidenced by the survey to parents through Survey Monkey, Online Scheduler data and Ticket Leap data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA Proficiency Ratings from Prior Year, Teacher Recommendation- 172 students NYS Math Proficiency Ratings from Prior Year, Teacher Recommendation, First Quarter Averages Students in Accelerated Courses – 199students Teacher recommendations and quarterly monitoring of subject grades Teacher recommendations and quarterly monitoring of subject grades School support team consisting of Guidance Counselors, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) use of i-Ready program for targeted intervention (lessons chosen by teacher and through diagnostic exam) use of i-Ready program for targeted intervention (lessons chosen by teacher and through diagnostic exam) use of i-Ready program for targeted intervention (lessons chosen by teacher and through diagnostic exam) use of i-Ready program for targeted intervention (lessons chosen by teacher and through diagnostic exam) Meetings occur a minimum of one time per week for a maximum of 10 weeks, at which Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school Small Group During the school day and after school Small Group During the school day and after school Small Group During the school day and after school Small group, one-to-one During the school day 2  Dean, School Administrators, point next steps are discussed. Social Worker, SAPIS Worker, psychologist meets weekly to discuss student needs. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4 Our STH receive backpacks, school supplies, books, etc. to alleviate any financial burdens to succeeding in school. In addition, we provide other educational services (e.g., counseling services, intervention programs) so that STH students have opportunities to progress socially, emotionally, and academically. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our Ambassadors/Professional Development TEAM conducted a needs assessment for all teachers. Individualized Professional Learning Plans are developed for teachers with less than effective practices. The NYC Chancellor’s Professional Learning Handbook is used to guide the ongoing development of the staff. All observations and professional development are aligned with the Danielson Framework. School Surveys and needs assessments are used to promote individual learning opportunities for staff. All untenured and new staff members participate in monthly meetings with the Principal, in addition to Subject Supervisor, Staff Developer and Buddy Teacher Utilization of Network Support and Workshops Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 6  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 7  Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 8   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Nathaniel Hawthorne Middle School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Nathaniel Hawthorne Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under theEvery Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Nathaniel Hawthorne Middle School 74 ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 3  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 4  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 5  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 60 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Overview Title III Sessions will be held for targeted ELLs in 6th, 7th, & 8th grades to provide literacy support. Sessions are taught by a certified ENL teachers. Sessions will be held mornings from 7:30-8 a.m., Wednesday afternoons 2:30-4:30 October to April and are open by priority to Entering-Transitioning students. The Saturday program runs from 9-11:30 a.m. from December to May and has a priority of accepting Expanding and Commanding students. During these sessions students will be provided with standalone instruction. Sessions will be provided in English with home language support of translation services to inform parents. Students will have access to bilingual dictionaries to assist them in improving their literacy skills. The student teacher ratio is 20:1 and will be taught by a certified ENL teacher. Morning & Afternoon Weekday Sessions There will be a total of 38 teaching hours between the morning and the afternoon Title III programs. The morning and afternoon sessions will assess ELLs language needs based on feedback from their teachers and provide necessary listening, speaking, reading and writing skills including paraphrasing, understanding keywords in context, using appropriate grammar and syntax to respond to task specific questions. The ENL teacher will use Inside Textbook by Cengage Learning, Picture Dictionaries, and Internet for research purposes. In the afternoon sessions, we will provide an arts based literacy curriculum developed by Mrs. Salas with supplemental that integrates kinesthetic, musical, tactile and linguistic intelligences in the second 60 minutes. During these arts lessons there will be a focus on related vocabulary and grammar. For example, students may learn and demonstrate understanding of prepositions during an ENL focused yoga session. During these lessons, students will also have the opportunity to practice the Community Language Learning technique in pairs and as a group to improve their oral and written language skills. During these sessions students will audio tape their conversations and replay them to identify and correct their mistakes. Students will also have the opportunity to write and perform context based skits and video tape these skits in order focus on oral skills including rhythm, intonation and pronunciation. In the Title III program we wish to inspire our students to succeed orally, written, reading and listening both inside and outside of school. We believe that in doing so, we will raise NYSESLAT test scores and long term fluency of the English language. Saturday Program The Saturday program is a language acquisition program using graphic art and design to complement literacy units of study centered around the themes of American and students' native cultures. Students will engage in activities designed to foster reading, writing and speaking skills through the "lens" of culture, as it relates to their real life experiences in America. Final student products will include both graphic designs and writing. There will be 15 two and a half hour sessions and two 6 hour trips. Trips will be planned to support the themes of the program and to bring the learning outside the classroom, for reflective writing, as students make connections to 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information themselves and units of study within the regular academic program. Travel costs will include buses and admission. Classes will be taught by a certified ENL teacher and an art teacher. The program runs from December through May on Saturdays from 9 - 11:30 A.M. (until 2PM on trip days). Students are divided into two groups; groups are based on student performance on both the NYS ELA Exam and on the NYSESLAT Exam. Each group spends 75 minutes with the ENL teacher and 75 minutes with the art teacher. All ENL students not attending the after school program are invited to attend the program through a distributed letter, which is translated according to home language surveys. ENL teachers will make recommendations for student placement in the programs based on their use of in class data collection protocols and formative assessments. Teachers will be given planning time to create rich units of study and prepare test preparation materials. We will hire an on-site supervisor for the Saturday program to oversee the instructional components, make trip arrangements and make parental contact. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Mrs. Salas and Mrs. Cacioppo (ENL coordinators) will attend various professional development programs throughout the year. These PDs will positively impact our ELLs as the teachers will increase their repertoire of language teaching strategies. The purpose of attending various PDs is to be informed of updated compliance regulations and how we can best serve our ELL population taking into consideration current mandates, standards and feedback. Queens North District 26 ELL Liasion meeting. Times: 8:30 AM - 2:30 PM (Ms. Salas & Ms. Cacioppo) Dates: Friday, October 19, 2018 Thursday, December 06, 2018 Thursday, March 21, 2019 Tuesday, June 18, 2019 Description:This cycle of professional learning is designed for the designated ELL Liaison/Coordinator of each of our schools within QN districts. Sessions will take place quarterly and will be comprised of a brief ELL compliance updates while the remainder of the day will focus on instruction. The professional growth of the ELL Liaisons will be supported by exploring various research-based pedagogy in ELL instruction as well as students’ social-emotional development. Sessions will be district-focused and aligned to instructional practices that aim to develop ELLs’ advanced literacy skills. Anticipated Outcomes:Participants will be engaged in hands-on activities that will enable them to build their repertoire of effective teaching practices as well as be informed with the most updated compliance-related matters. NYU R-BERN PD- TBD All PDs will be turnkeyed to the other Title III teachers during our Monday Teacher Team Meetings. Records will be maintained by the payroll secretary and staff developer. Saturday Program 9  Part C: Professional Development Ms. Papamichael will attend the following: Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Throughout the year there will be several parent meetings targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. The purpose of these parental engagement activities is to build a community that can support each other from both socio-emotional and academic perspectives. Parents of targeted students for after school support program will be invited to a one hour workshop to inform them of strategies to help their children at home. Parents will also be invited to an introductory workshop to inform them of the language acquisition skills that students will be exposed to during the Saturday program. Parents will be notified through notices and through the school phone messenger (translated by the DOE translation unit and by school's phone messenger service). Both workshops will be led by certified ENL teachers. Schedule: December 17th: 6 p.m.-7 p.m. Strategies for English as a New Language Success led by Mrs. Salas & Mrs. Cacioppo Description: Based on our interviews with parents during parent orientation, we have learned of the need for parents to learn strategies assist their child in acquiring the English language and developing routines to facilitate this. This workshop will provide interactive tools and strategies for both parent who do speak English as well as those who are ELLs. ELL parents will be provided with a list of adult literacy programs in the area. February 11th: 6 p.m. - 7 p.m. Cultural Celebrations: Building an ELL Parent Community led by Mrs. Salas & Mrs. Cacioppo Description: The majority our our ELL population is Chinese and therefore we will celebrate the Lunar New Year and engage parents in activities to get to know each other. We will also address socio-emotional needs that have come up throughout the school year. April 3rd: 9 a.m.-10 a.m. & 6 p.m. – 7 p.m. NYSESLAT Parent meeting led by Mrs. Salas & Mrs. Cacioppo Description: This meeting will inform parents of the upcoming NYSESLAT test and provide an overview of the areas of focus on the exam. Teacher will explain how they have prepared students for the exam, and how parents/guardians can also assist their children. The meeting will also go over the various ENL levels and mandated time. We will be available to support parents and answer any specific questions. October 25, 2018: 9 a.m.- 2 p.m. WORKING TOGETHER TO SUPPORT ELLs/MLLs COMMUNITIES ON THE ROAD TO HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION, COLLEGE AND CAREERS 2018 ELLs/MLLs COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT SYMPOSIUM 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Location: New York University Audience: Assistant Principals, ENL/Bilingual Coordinators, School Leadership Teams, Parent Advocates, PTA Members, CBOs, Adult Education Staff, Parent Coordinators, Guidance Counselors, Teacher Assistants, Parents/Families and other personnel that work with English Language Learners (ELLs)/ Multilingual Learners (MLLs) PURPOSE: This Symposium will highlight essential resources and strategies that stakeholders can use to support parents of K-12 English Language Learners (ELLs)/Multilingual Learners (MLLs), as they guide their children towards high school graduation, college and careers. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12117.03  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials. 574.53 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. After school teacher per session:$2,304.70 (2 Teachers x 19 sessions x 1 hour x $60.65)- Saturday teacher per session:$4,548.75 (2 teachers x 15 sessions x 2.5 hours x $60.65)$1,455.60 (2 teachers x 2 sessions x 6 hours)$121.30 (2 teachers x 1 session x 1 hour x $60.65)- Saturday supervisor per session:$2,379.38 (1 supervisor x 15 sessions x 2.5 hours x $63.45)$761.40 (1 supervisor x 2 sessions x 6 hours x $63.45) Per session for parent workshops: $363.90 (2 teachers x 3 sessions x 1 hour x $60.65) -Per diem for Professional Development ($182) ink, paper, supplies for creation of student work and supplemental texts, 5 yoga mats, pocket folders, tape 1  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1000 13,691.56 Buses, Admission, etc. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name Nathaniel Hawthorne Middle School Borough Queens School Number 074 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anthony Armstrong Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Diana Cacioppo Teacher/Subject Area Jaclyn Michelli (S & L) Teacher/Subject Area Juliette Salas (ENL) Related-Service Provider Penny Kelberg. S & L Teacher Superintendent Assistant Principal Lisa Perlstein Coach School Counselor Emoke Beickert Parent Cathy Grodsky Parent Coordinator Christine Spagnolo Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Paul DeSimone - Sp. Ed Coord C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 3 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1171 Total number of ELLs 94 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.03% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 n/a 3 n/a 2 n/a 4 n/a K n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 n/a 6 n/a 7 n/a 8 n/a 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Early Literacy skills are tested using a variety of methods. Ms 74 utilizes TCRWP, I-ready, a single K-12 adaptive diagnostic for reading that pinpoints student needs down to the sub-skill level, and ongoing progress monitoring shows whether students are on track to achieve end-of-year targets. I-ready combines a valid and reliable growth measure and individualized instruction that teachers use to guide their instruction to adapt to ELLs needs. In addition, utilizing the NYSITELL, Spanish LAB and the NYSESLAT, we assess early literacy skills of our ELLs using data from scores in Listening/Speaking/Reading and Writing. We also use observations of student work and language use to assess the growth and progress of our ELLs' language and literacy skills. We administer the ELL periodic assessments, INSIDE by National Geographic and ELL specific rubrics. By using this data, we help inform our school's instructional plan by observing strengths and areas in need of support for our ELLs, ensuring help for all content teachers to differentiate lessons in order to reach our students. Our students range from Entering to Commanding 4  level. Our classroom practices reflect our school wide focus: data driven instruction, multiple entry points and student engagement. Teachers are encouraged to use student performance data from various assessments to plan instruction and differentiate teaching and learning. We have analyzed and assessed ELL performance through creating portfolios which include results from EDAT data tool, ELA, Math tests to determine whether a student is improving or at risk. Our team works to identify and assess any external factors such as social and emotional needs. We have noticed across all grade levels the acquisition of listening occurs at a more rapid rate than in speaking, reading and writing. Content area teachers scaffold instruction by utilizing graphic organizers, visuals, modeling and purposeful groupings to support students strengths and target students needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Formative assessments are done with a variety checks for understanding throughout the lesson. The ENL department has created a speaking, listening, reading and writing rubric for content specific material. We have weekly meetings with ELA teachers and support staff. MS74 has a focus on media literacy and 21st century skills and the staff developer provides exemplars on how to set benchmarks and how to formatively assess various levels throughout the class to determine whether they are progressing. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Evaluating the success of the ELL programs can be done in a variety of ways. The ENL department uses of pre and post curricular assessments, ELL periodic assessments, Spanish Lab and other content area assessments. Data is examined to determine progression or regression of the ELL students. Informal and formal conversations, Skedula, teacher observations and collaboration with general education teachers can determine if the ELL students are making progress. Our ELL teachers (and other staff members who service our ELLs) plan lessons to increase the amount of reading and writing in their classrooms, incorporate scaffolding techniques to support ELLs, stress academic vocabulary, and engage students in meaningful reading and writing activities. Addressing students' native language skills are achieved through native language picture dictionaries and independent reading books in the native language. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ELLs who have been identified in need of interventions will receive additional services. We have the following services in place: pull out 1x per week for ELA & Math; Title III ELL after school program or our Saturday ELL program; LPT interventions to address emotional or mental factors influencing a students performance on summative assessments. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The RTI framework is geared for grades K-5, however our school uses the RTI Framework as a guide to support our students. If an ELL scores below specified levels of performance on the English language proficiency assessment or on the iReady diagnostic program coupled with the NYS ELA exam of the prior year, we determine if additional Tier II or Tier III support services are needed for a student based on evidence reviewed. Some of the evidence reviewed includes, the amount of years of service in an ENL/Bilingual program, the English/home language literacy, the content and socio-emotional needs of students, content area teacher recommendations, parent or guardian requests, samples of student work in home language and/or English and a bilingual educational evaluation if student is suspected of a disability. The support services provided are aligned with intervention plans the school is providing to all students. These additional supports include push-in, pull-out services, AIS, and small group instruction. ELLs receive specific pull outs for content areas in which they are struggling. Through the use of the periodic assessments, summative and formative assessments, iReady data and collaboration with general education teachers, appropriate RTI can be determined on an ongoing basis if progress is not attained. RTI is provided prior to referral in particular cases when there is a suspected learning disability as opposed to a language acquisition need. In particular for long term ELLS at the Entering or Emerging levels (who generally have a higher proficiency in speaking and listening skills) there is a focus on bridging the gap to ELA and Social Studies grade appropriate content. For long term ELLs who only receive push-in services, reading and writing skills are differentiated by content area teachers with the assistance of 5  the ENL department. Long term ELLs who do not have an IEP will also be considered for evaluation in order to assess difficulties that are not related to language acquisition. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data analyzed on the NYSITELL reveals that the largest majority of students scoring at the entering/emerging level are in the 7 th grade. This is due to the large number of newcomers. Once students are tested we are able to view their levels along with all eligible ELLs on the RLAT from ATS. On both the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT students scored higher in speaking and listening, than reading and writing across the grades. The data patterns reveal that the test scores reflect the need for development and strengthening of literacy skills, across all content areas. Students scores were higher in speaking and listening than reading and writing across all grades.The data has show us that we need to include additional comprehensible input by teaching academic vocabulary and emphasizing writing across content areas. Focusing on comprehensible input will strengthen their writing skills in both the ENL and English classrooms. Collaboration between the ENL teacher and the content teachers help focus on students strengths and discuss strategies that will help foster growth scores on the NYSESLAT skills areas and will integrate across content areas. EDAT is used to inform our school of long term ELLs and to view the areas in which these ELLs are not progressing on the NYSESLAT. EDAT can determine the growth percentile of ELLs and whether they are at risk and require RTI. EDAT can also assist the ENL teacher to determine specific subgroups such as speaking or listening which may need additional instruction and assessment throughout the year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our LPT meets regularly to discuss adjustments that need to be made to accommodate ELLS. A data binder is kept with all test scores that is accessable to the LPT team. Spreadsheets of data from state tests are disseminated at staff meetings and evaluated through a case study each year in order to analyze and determine targeted needs. During subject team meetings we are given time to make adjustments to the curriculum in order to make diagnostic and summative assessments. The outcome of the NYSESLAT test scores are placed on onedrive for staff to view and place students in appropriate classes for the highest level of growth. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELLs are identified by the ENL teacher each year and communicated to the general education class teachers regarding the strengths and weaknesses for them to gear instruction towards their specific needs. Our fully licensed and certified teachers conduct both the push-in and pull-out programs with English being the language of instruction. The ELL program at Nathaniel Hawthorne Middle School 74 supports the efforts of all English Language Learners in acquiring English language skills and achieving English language proficiency in a requisite timeframe. MS 74 ELL students are grouped heterogeneously by grade. Entering and Emerging students are pulled out by grade during elective classes and receive stand alone ENL instruction for 180 minutes per week. In addition to freestanding ENL instruction, Entering/Emerging/Transitioning/Expanding/Commanding students all receive push-in ENL instruction by Ms. Cacioppo & Ms. Salas during ELA & Social Studies at least 180 minutes per week. The ENL teacher pushes into content area periods for Commanding students at least 90 minutes per week. Each proficiency level receives additional ENL support during their ELA and/or other content areas per the CR Part 154. The instructional program implemented at MS 74 ensures continued language development by combining the workshop model, content area instruction, and thematic units through the components of a balanced literacy model. 6  b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? MS74 ensures adequate staffing of licensed ENL pedagogues to deliver the required instructional minutes for each proficiency level. Our ELL program services students in grades 6 through 8. The ENL teachers take the students from various elective classes and bring them together for small group English instruction, with 12-20 students per group. Instructional time as per CR 154 is based on their proficiency level. Our Entering and Emerging students receive at least 360 minutes of instruction per week, while our Transitioning and Expanding students receive at least 180 minutes of instruction per week. Our Commanding students receive at least 90 minutes of instruction per week to support them during their content area classes for 2 years after they test Proficient/Commanding on the NYSESLAT. ELLs receive ELA instruction from a certified ELA teacher by grade level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We differentiate instruction for ELLs in content and freestanding ENL classrooms. Our ELLs receive 25% of their instruction minutes in native language literacy by virtue of bilingual glossaries in content areas, classroom library books in native languages, as well as word to word native language to English and English to native language dictionaries. A Balanced Literacy approach is used to foster rapid growth of academic language along with English language acquisition. In the Reading Workshop, students develop language and academic skills through Read Aloud, shared reading, guided reading, independent reading, word recognition, and vocabulary strategies. These activities serve to reinforce and address the state ENL standard which requires students to listen, speak, read and write in English for literary response, enjoyment and expression. Content objectives are reviewed and visually displayed prior to each lesson.Supplementary materials are used to promote comprehension such as charts, graphs, pictures, illustrations, realia and demonstrations by teachers and/or students. Ells are grouped purposefully to support language and content objectives. Clear explanation of tasks are made step-by-step with visuals if appropriate. Students receive chapter summaries in their native languages through the INSIDE program by National Geographic, which covers Science, Social Studies, and various literacy genres. Through INSIDE we can provide students Common Core standard driven instruction with multiple points of entry. INSIDE is designed to build literacy and move students through the stages of language acquisition. Reading selections reflect a diversity of cultures, perspectives, topics and genres and are filled with colorful visuals and academic rich vocabulary. In the writing workshop, teachers model and demonstrate Common Core standards based writing, and students are responsible for writing narrative accounts, narrative essays, and responding to text, writing for information and other forms of grade level writing according to their proficiency level. Grammar and writing lessons are incorporated in each unit to help scaffold student's writing skills. ELLs are encouraged to learn 21st century skills and thus, to also learn language through media literacy. A digital library is also used to encourage reading selections to build student interest. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language throughout the year through both reading and writing tasks. Specifically, student are asked to read books in their home language and respond with a book report in their home language. Translators within the school evaluate ELL in their home language throughout the year. Student's native language skills are achieved through teacher/student created materials that include bilingual dictionaries, vocabulary cards, picture dictionaries in various languages and independent reading books in their native language. 7  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Congruency between ENL teachers and content teachers, and communication regarding student progress, planning and instruction are made frequently. a.SIFE students are given diagnostics assessments and a formal interview with the LPT team. The LPT determines the gap in instruction and the bridge that can provide multiple entry points within the curricula. SIFE students are given socio-emotional support to succeed throughout the school and community. Specifically, there is a focus on sight words, phonics and literacy. SIFE students are given differentiated objectives and homework as well as content specific materials in their content area subjects. SIFE students receive small pull-out teaching as well as after school assistance. Advisory teams work with SIFE students to find ways to bring in their strengths into the classroom-such as highlighting achievements at the end of projects. Our theatre teacher is also ENL certified and enables students to acquire the English language through speaking and acting.b. The ENL program includes content vocabulary, grammar, academic language and phonetic awareness. Newcomer ENL instruction focuses on building background knowledge, teaching key concepts, providing instructional materials in students native language, teaching specialized vocabulary needed to scaffold learning, including visuals, graphs, word walls, and realia are used to scaffold learning. c. Developing ELLs' data such as students' work and interviews with content area teachers to pinpoint student's weaknesses and strengths. Thus, ENL instructors align their teaching to the school wide curricula in order for ELLs to be able to integrate as much as possible within their ELA class. For example, during the Fall quarter, ELLs work on a narrative unit in collaboration with the ELA teachers. Differentiation of texts, strategies and skills occur with support of Inside textbook as well as teacher developed materials. d. Long Term: ENL and content area teachers collaborate to use strategies to support the needs of our ELLs receiving 4 to 6 years. Since many remain in ENL because they have not yet become proficient in writing, special emphasis is placed on helping students develop this skill, providing scaffolding if needed, then removing them as student becomes more proficient. e. Former ELLs are placed in the general education classroom and are provided scaffolding in areas if needed. Determination of recommended scaffolding supports result from informal meetings during the school day between the general education teacher and ENL teacher. Former ELLS are given additional support by the ENL teacher 90 minutes per week through push-in during content area classes. Test accommodations for former ELLs are also given for two years after testing commanding on the NYSESLAT or Expanding with an ELA grade of 3 or 4 as per CR Part 154.2. Testing accommodations for State assessments include: Time extensions, separate location, third reading of listening selection on ELA exam, bilingual dictionaries/glossaries that provide direct translations only.Overall, teachers provide opportunities for all ELL students to engage in linguistically complex and content-rich tasks, including negotiating meaning in disciplinary discourse. Teachers utilize flexible and fluid grouping instructions, group students both heterogeneously and homogeneously to address the needs of students with various levels of English proficiency. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? After reviewing the students IEP, the pedagogues servicing these students familiarize themselves with the goals and needs of students. ELL-SWDs are serviced in self contained, ICT and general education classes according to ther IEP mandates. ELLs are delivered culturally and linguistically appropriate instruction and are adjusted to students needs such as interests and learning styles in the least restrictive environment. Flexibility in instruction and scheduling reflects the needs of our students IEPs are reviewed in the beginning and during the year to ensure goals and modifications are met for each ELL. For Newcomer, Developing, Long-term, SIFE and Former ELLs, instructional focus is aligned with CCLS and focuses on attaining language skills, incorporating student's culture and activating background knowledge. In addition, comprehensible input for ELA, Science and Social Studies is presented through graphic organizers, photographs, documents, videos, vocabulary lists, glossaries, and dictionaries. Technology such as ipads, smartboards and utilization of computers during lessons help support students interests and enable students to translate key vocabulary or concepts into their native language. Instructional planning 8  incorporates frequent opportunities for student interaction in order to accelerate language skills and student engagement. We also offer a Wednesday after school program which focuses on bridging the gap in language proficiency through content area instruction. In addition there is a Saturday Title III program which focuses on English Language acquisition through graphic arts. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? MS 74 uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. Based on IEP recommendations, the appropriate program is selected. Flexible scheduling allows ELL-SWDs to interact socially and academically during recess, lunch, and in-school programs such as dance, graphic arts, computer labs, music, physical education and chorus. Interaction during these activities propel social and academic growth through peer interactions during instruction. During the course of the school year, meetings between teachers and administration occur to ensure proper placement. Department teams offer curriculum mapping for planning to be aligned with. Content area teachers modify curriculum based on their IEPs goals to suit the ELL-SWD's language and academic needs.Modification may include skeleton outlines of lessons, sentence frames, modified graphic organizers, providing pre-reading questions and including conversation sentence starters for students to engage in turn and talk and/or small group conversations. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ENL teachers and content area instructors work together to support the individual needs of each student. The congruency meetings allow content area teachers and ENL teachers the opportunity to to review data from state exams, observations and samples of student work. Our ELLs have the opportunity to participate in the Title III supplemental program on Wednesday for Entering and Emerging ELLs to support academic needs for ELLS with certified instructors in any content area. The Saturday ENL program focuses on English Language Acquisition for Transitioning & Expanding students which focus on advanced speaking, vocabulary and writing through Graphic Arts. The Saturday program is instructed in English. Pull out programs have been established within the academic areas of ELA and Mathematics. The intent of these programs is to help our students meet and/or exceed the Common Core Learning Standards for their grades. Classroom teachers, (ENL and General education teachers) meet and design targeted content area instruction that is tailored to the needs of our ELLs. Individual teachers of Science and Social Studies provide intervention services for content during students' free periods. Intervention services for content classes are ongoing throughout the year and utilize bilingual dictionaries, bilingual picture dictionaries and other technology that may assist students in their native language. MS 74 also offers a variety of after school intervention services in ELA and Math. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are offered during AIS services as well. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our ELA department has worked meticulously creating units that are aligned to the CCLS both horizontally and vertically with each grade. The ELA curriculum focuses on providing various pathways throughout the curriculum used to engage ALL students through multiple entry points and differentiation. Based of data and trends we will focus on targeting ELLs who have scored below 3 on the ELA exam for 3 consecutive years. These ELLs will receive additional pull out for both ELA and ENL to bridge the gap. Trends have indicated a lack of abiility to acquire ELA & Social studies content at the Entering and Emerging levels due to the higher level vocabulary and speed of class delivery. Sixth grade ELA & Social Studies teachers will receive training from the ENL department on specific language related activities such as thematic vocabulary or differentiated writing tasks. Seventh and Eighth grade Entering and Emerging students will receive CORE (ELA & Social Studies) with a certified ENL/ELA teacher. CORE will assist ELLs in their zone of proximal development to acquire the appropriate content area language as opposed to not understanding content area textbooks which are not available in Mandarin or Korean. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs that will be discontinued this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 9  ELLs will be afforded the same access to our before, after, and in school programs. Some of the programs offered include dance, music, chorus, graphic arts and moving image. Our various in-school programs are provided and offered to the entire school population which include ELLs. Our afternoon program addresses the needs of our Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding students by helping them with content area subject material, study skills and specific ELA reading strategies to prepare our students for the NY State ELA exam in April. We also offer before school programs such as A.M. fitness, yoga club, and free library and computer time to all students. Students are sent letters home inviting them to participate in our Wednesday and Saturday Title III program. We also offer a Wednesday after school program which focuses on bridging the gap in language proficiency through content area instruction. In addition there is a Saturday Title III program which focuses on English Language acquisition through graphic arts. Which has benefited Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding ELL students with cultural enrichment as well as extra language support and skills they need to move along the continuum to the level of proficiency. All students are invited to participate in all before and after school programs and are notified of activities through translated letters sent home and/or announcements, peers who speak the same language are asked to translate to students as well. Many former ELLS participate in additional after school clubs such as Science Olympiads. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs during day to day lessons include Smartboards, ipads, laptops and computers. Through the use of technology all subgroups of ELLs are reached in a multifaceted manner during core content areas. Information is presented through multiple with the intent of ELLs to undertake more cognitively demanding tasks and concepts in combination with rigorous instruction aligned with the CCLS enhance understanding and clarify meaning. Entering, Emerging & Transitional: bilingual dictionaries, Imagine Learning, translated materials, abridged novels of specific content areas, picture dictionaries Advanced: Graphic Organizer and exemplars of writing. Rubrics specific to speaking, listening, reading and writing that address gaps and targeted points of interventions such as rhythm or Tier III vocabuarly. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In freestanding and push-in ENL, students are paired with a partner who speaks the same language and meaningful conversations related to the task are made in both English and the native language. In addition, bilingual texts, bilingual picture dictionaries and/or translations of materials are provided. A bilingual mandarin paraprofessional assists science and math teachers when necessary. Our school currently does not have DL or TBE programs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Data driven instruction uses the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT scores, state test results and the Pearson periodic assessment for English Language Learners, to help form appropriate differentiation of instruction. Additionally, the ENL teachers collaborate with the content teachers to keep up to date with core subject curricula and timeliness. In the content classrooms, ELL students are given the opportunity to utilize the computer lab and library computers to improve literacy, writing and research skills. Our inquiry teams focus on ENL methodologies and techniques to enhance learning for our ELLs in every classroom, in every grade all the time.Classroom and ENL teachers coordinate to design lessons that compliment content area instruction while taking different cognitive learning styles and strength in language modalities into consideration. Our newcomer students are provided with bilingual (picture) dictionaries, and bilingual book choices (libraries) in classrooms. Individual and group projects, oral presentations, and writing samples are all used to assess the development of all ELL student progress.ENL and content area teachers also collaborate to use strategies to support the needs of our ELLs receiving 4 to 6 years. Since many remain in ENL because they have not yet become proficient in writing, special emphasis is placed on helping students develop this skill during ELA instruction. Re-teaching skills such as paraphrasing, summarizing, bracketing that will aid students in both reading and writing are implemented to achieve success. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 0  Our School offers a Title III funded Saturday program and all ELLs including newly enrolled are invited to participate. The program is designed to further promote language acquisition skills such as speaking and writing through a graphic arts program. The program focuses on developing the skills needed to take the NYSESLAT and NYS ELA tests. Mrs. Cacioppo and Mrs. Salas (ENL Instructors) run the afterschool Wednesday program with a focus on addressing individual language needs and assisting newcomers to assimilate into our school. Ms. Leon, a certified ENL teacher and Ms. Papamichael, who teaches graphic arts at MS74 run the program. Mr. Schaefer, an AP, supervises the Saturday program. Prior to to the school year, ELL parents have the opportunity to meet with our parent coordinator. Throughout the year, our parent coordinator distributes translated materials regarding school programming such as pupilpath and PTA meetings as well as announcements about citywide events that are targeted for the ELL community. Newly enrolled ELLs have the opportunity to meet with the school counselor, social worker or psychologist when necessary with translation should the acculturation process prove to be challenging. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? MS 74 offers 7 th and 8 th graders Spanish language instruction five days a week. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There are many ways that our staff collaborates to help drive curriculum for our ELL population. Professional development includes a minimum of 15% of required professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of ELLs as per CR Part 80. Training is given to teachers of ELLs and non-ELLs, guidance counselor, Assistant Principals, and paraprofessionals, secretaries and occupational therapists which includes NYS standards and mandates, ELL instructors methodologies and strategies for content areas. Our staff developer provides ongoing professional development workshops within the school day in our efforts to support all educators of ELLs in developing appropriate best practices and ELL strategies. During faculty conferences, grade conferences, department meetings, and city wide professional development days, our staff further explore strategies and techniques with ELL experts from within or outside our school building. All educators participate in weekly inquiry department meetings at which student and teacher work is examined to align curriculum with rigor and CCLS when designing ELL lesson plans. In addition, certified ENL teachers, content teachers, and administrators attend ongoing off-site conferences throughout the year. Queens North Field Support Center provides staff development off-site. Mrs. Cacioppo enrolls in the Common Core Aligned Strategies for ELLs which meets 1x per month to address current and specific needs of ELLS.Mrs. Salas enrolled in professional development through: DELLS, RBERN, Queens North and citywide TESOL conferences. Some titles include: Scaffolding for ELLS in the Science Classroom (RBERN); Scaffolding Grade Level Texts (DELLS); Bilingual Symposium.Content area teachers are offered the opportunity to attend ELL specific PDs. For example, Ms. Barbach (Math) attended: Scaffolding for ELLs in the Mathematics classroom. ELL instructors turnkey to content area teachers as well.Ms. Perlstein, Assistant Principal, Mrs. Salas & Mrs. Cacioppo attend PD specific to ELL administration such as EDAT & LAP (Queens North)ELL teachers receive a minimum of 50% and teachers of ELLs receive 15% of total pd hours is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus of best 1  practices for co-teaching strategies, integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. A focus on how to teach ELLs strategies to master material in ELA. Some of the strategies include how to differentiate to make content comprehensible by utilizing simplified language, using translated materials to scaffold and importance of providing frequent opportunities for interaction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Ms 74 has in- house professional development that is provided to our child support team (CST) and staff in order to help our ELLs transition to high school. Our ENL teacher attends CST meetings to articulate ENL strategies to support Students. The ENL teachers and CST team conducts parent meetings both individually and in whole groups to throughout the school year to support transition of students. The Guidance counselors meet to familiarize students and parent engagement throughout the High School process and beyond. All Teachers receive "Excellence for All" training to support diverse needs of students including ELLs. They also receive strategic Professional Development that is aligned with our Theory of Action. Our Theory of Action focuses on continuing to increase the knowledge and skill of ALL teachers regarding data driven instruction, multiple entry points, engaging all students and questioning and discussion techniques. Our teachers continue to able to construct rigorous performance tasks embedded in Common Core aligned units of study that reflect student diversity and student engagement of learning. Our ENL staff facilitates professional development focused on helping our ELLs transition between middle school and high school. Further, our school administration guides our teachers toward the CCLS for high school to help our 8th grade ELLs prepare for the rigor of 9th grade curriculum and demands. We ensure all teachers of ELLs receive the minimum of 15% total hours and ELL teachers receive 50% total hours of professional development specific to the needs of ELLs, co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction. An ESL support specialist invites all new teachers to attend our monthly ENL meetings; also our ENL staff turnkey’s information to our general teaching staff to ensure all mandated training minutes/percentages are met. An agenda is given and attendance is taken. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ELL parents are an integral and welcomed part of our school community. Parents of ELL students are informed about ELL instructions, policies, and student progress throughout the year via email, phone calls or letters. In addition, we have implemented two parent meetings in the evening to discuss program updates. Every effort is made to communicate with parents in their native language using translated letters and translators. The administration, teacher, and parent coordinator collaborate with the ENL teachers to ensure parents are welcomed, informed, and involved in their children’s education. As part of our parent outreach, student performance reports and other crucial communication are provided in the native language (Chinese, Korean, Arabic, Urdu, Russian, Spanish, Bengali and Serbian) to parents. Translators are hired to assist during Parent-Teacher conferences and prior to the high school application process. At the start of the school year, ELL parents are invited to Back to School Night where they are informed of the goals of the program as well as the specific assessment used to determine ELL proficiency levels. In addition, we discuss the number of mandated minutes and how we service each level of proficiency within the content area subjects. The meeting discusses interventions such as Homework Help with translated services. In addition, it is emphasized to speak, listen, read and write in English as much as possible at home in order to improve language proficiency. In January, we meet with ELL parents to address challenges and work on strategies for parents to assist their children to progress in English. In April, we meet with ELL parents to discuss the NYSESLAT and how parents can continue help prepare their children for this exam. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2  In reference to question number 2, records of attendance to meetings, copies of letters, emails and any additional documents regarding communication with parents are kept on file for reference.Throughout the year, parents receive notices regarding a variety of services and workshops provided by community based organizations. These include classes in English, workshops on how to access services and cultural activities that they and their children can participate in. Currently District 26 offers Adult ESL instruction, and parents were notified through translated flyers. We also offer workshops to parents to demonstrate the use of pupilpath and how they can use it to communicate with teachers and monitor their child's assignments and grades.Other successful workshops MS 74 has offered include:NYSESLAT information Parent MeetingENL Mandates and Services/How to best enable your child to succeed The administration, teacher, and parent coordinator collaborate with the ENL teachers to ensure parents are welcomed, informed, and involved in their children’s education. In the past, parents have actively participated in visiting their children's classrooms during open school week.The parent coordinator works closely with school staff, school leadership teams, parent associations, community groups and parent advisory councils to engage family involvement. Our parent coordinator attends parent meetings, organizes open school night and provides a welcoming school environment for parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anthony Armstrong, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Nathaniel Hawthorne School DBN: 26Q074 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anthony Armstrong Title Principal Lisa Perlstein Assistant Principal Carol Spagnolo Parent Coordinator Diana Cacioppo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Cathy Grodsky Parent Jaclyn Michelli Teacher/Subject Area Penny Kelberg Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Emoke Beickert School Counselor Danielle Giunta Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Paul DeSimone Other Special Ed. AP Juliette Salas Other ENL Instructor Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 06/21/17 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Nathaniel Hawthorne Middle School Superintendent: Danielle Guinta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school retrieves information from multiple sources, in order to assess the written translation and oral interpretation needs of our parents. These sources include: ATS Home Language Report of Parent's preferred language, Parent's Home Language Survey for New Admits, Blue Emergency contact card information, discussion with ENL Teacher, and teacher surveys collected in general education classrooms. In addition to other personnel. In addition, parents are empowered to request translated materials in their native language and is advised through a translator at parent meetings. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 6 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parents preferred languages for both written and oral communication include English, Chinese-Mandarin, Cantonese, Urdu, Korean, Spanish, Serbian, Arabic, Hindi. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Letters sent home from the administration, including parent-teacher conferences, student handbooks, Title III Saturday/after-school Academy and other letters are translated using the NYCDOE translation unit and kept on file for future use. The high school application information is provided in the home language, according to ATS. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to We offer interpretation services using the NYCDOE Translation Unit for all of our provide interpretation service(s)? 7  parent-teacher conferences, parent workshops and parent meetings. In addition, we utilize bilingual school based staff to provide translation services during parent meetings with teachers, administration.Specific dates and times of parent workshops is unknown at this time. Phone calls from guidance counselors will vary depending on the nature of the call. Guidance will request a translator during calls with parents through translators available in school or will utilize the translation hotline. We request translators for all state assessments. Fall Parent Teacher conferences are scheduled for November 17 and 18, 2015. Spring Parent Teacher conferences are scheduled for March 16 and 17 and May 11, 2016, translators will requested in a timely manner to ensure they will be present at all meetings. In the event a parent requests to schedule a meeting, translators will be requested in a timely manner to ensure they are available. If a translator is unavailable, we would offer to reschedule for a date and time one would be available and advise parent of same. Upcoming workshops are still in the planning process and a date has not been scheduled yet. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 8  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) During enrollment, the initial screening is completed by a trained pedagogue who presents a Home Language Identifcation Survey (HLIS) to parents in order to determine what language the child speaks at home. This process also includes an interview in the parent' home language. The ENL Teacher invites parents of ELLs to attend a workshop within a 10 day school day windo of initial enrollment. At this workshop the mandated video is shown, in addition to the following: school web site, www.MS74.com, curriculum materials, SKEDULA sign-in, ARIS and we discuss the importance of content glossaries and word to word dictionaries. The parent also fills out a parent survey and program selection form. If a child scores below proficiency on the NYSITELL, the parent is given an Entitlement Letter, Parent Survey, Program Selection Form and Placement Letter. Parents of a child who scores at or above proficiency are given a Non Entitlement Letter. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will provide a parent survey in both the home language and English to gather feedback on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services. We will also consider scheduling a focus group representating all cultures and languages in our school to gather additional feedback and to discuss best practices on parents concerns or issues set forth. 9 
