 25Q079 School Name: P.S. 079 FRANCIS LEWIS Principal: GEORGE CARTER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 79 The Francis Lewis School 342500010079 Pre-K – 5 School Number (DBN): 25Q079 147-27 15 th Drive Whitestone, NY 11357 718-767-0396 718-746-3103 Phone Number: Fax: George Carter GCarter3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: George Carter Email Address: Alycia MorellandLauraJeanBallon Bessie Kokotos Mariella Barkouras NA NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 25 Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: DDiMang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7605 Phone Number: 718-281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Queens North Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast   Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens 11101 4th Floor Executive Director’s Email Address: Lpender@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 917-225-2020 Fax: 718-391-8320   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) George Carter LaurajeanBallon Bessie Kokotos Lauren Moyal Diana Natole MariellaBarkouras *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nina Zito Kristan Gabriel Lauren Hamilton Gina DAngelo Holly Hill Heather Drastal Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision statement: Section 4: CEP Overview Our vision is to provide our students with a well-rounded, rigorous education with a focus on the arts and technology. At PS 79Q we set goals to maximize student progress through data driven instruction and engaging students in higher-order thinking. We believe in providing an individualized approach to help students achieve their maximum potential.   Mission Statement: Students at PS 79Q learn in a nurturing environment that promotes higher-level thinking, problem solving, and self-reliance. Our mission is to educate the whole child, foster curiosity and creativity, and prepare students for college and beyond. The P.S. 79 staff, families, and students work together to make sure that all students can become lifelong learners, risk takers, and problem solvers. Students are driven by high expectations and a rigorous curriculum and strong school community ties. We seek to foster creative expression through music, art, drama and dance. Through our standards based school curricula and our Arts programs, students receive a well-rounded enriching experience. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 079Q, the Francis Lewis school is an elementary school with 1,135 students from Pre-Kindergarten to grade 5. The school population comprises 1% Black, 19% Hispanic, 52% Asian and 27% White. The student body includes 10% English Language Learners and 12% students with special needs. P.S. 079Q and the P.T.A. have collaborated to provide a rigorous, well-rounded educational program that fosters the development of literate, creative, culturally aware and technologically competent learners. The school community creates an environment that promotes excellence in achievement, in which students strive to meet or exceed Common Core Learning Standards. This is evident in the fact that 73% percent of the students are on or above grade level on the New York State ELA in 2018, which was a 2% increase from 2017. 70% of the students scored on or above grade level on the New York State Math test in 2018. It is the goal of the school to encourage a love of learning through innovative, interactive and challenging programs. The school’s curricula consists of Go Math, Teachers’ College Reading and Writing Workshops, Foss Science and the New York City Passport to Social Studies. P.S. 079Q features a robust Arts curriculum that incorporates Music, Dance, Content Area Art, Computer Science, and Theatre. In addition, our Learning Garden incorporates both aquatic life and a study of horticulture that will supplement the school's Science curriculum, and help educate students on the importance of a healthy lifestyle through hands on learning. The school has partnered with community-based organizations such as Teachers’ College, Metropolitan Opera Guild, Marquis Arts, Ballroom Dance and the HAKS Engineering. Most recently, we have developed a partnership with the Masonic Lodge of Whitestone and New York Newday's Kidsday. We also encourage student teachers to participate in our community of learners through our partnerships with Queens College, University of Southern California, Hofstra University, and The College of New Rochelle. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Teachers are analyzing student data and work products in order to reflect on the level of rigor of content and skills taught. At this stage of curricula and task planning, teachers throughout the school are building learning plans into units of study that emphasize content skills and areas of focus, such as embedding deeper problem solving strategies and infusing vocabulary. Culminating academic tasks address these focus areas in order to make accurate adjustments to curriculum based on student outcomes so that all students have access to the curriculum. Instruction reflects the instructional shifts in literacy and math and teachers are making modifications to surface the critical thinking capacities of English language learners and students with disabilities. This allows for opportunities for students with disabilities and English language learners to learn at high levels to maximize academic achievement. Our ELL population represents 10.04% of the total student population and our special needs population represents 12.16% of the total student population. In most classrooms, all learners are speaking in front of peers and are participating fully. Teachers provide sufficient supports in the form of charts or sentence frames to meet students at 0  their entry points. As a result, all students are able to fully engage in the learning taking place and produce as meaningful work products. When presented with challenging tasks, students are asked to explain how they arrived at their responses. Students work collaboratively in strategically organized groups and partnerships and are able to critique one another and support their claims with evidence. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, we made the most progress in the areas of Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership. We have made concerted effort to ensure that teams of teachers have scheduled time to meet in order to plan their instruction together. As a result, 96% of teachers indicate they design instructional programs together, and 100% of teachers say that they talk to one another about instruction. The principal holds himself to high standards and puts forth clear strategies for improvement for the success of the school. As a result, 100% of teachers indicate that the principal sets high standards for student learning; 100% of teachers indicate that the principal communicates a clear vision for the school; 82% of teachers indicate that the principal participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers; and 100% of teachers indicate that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress. For the 2018-2019 school year, our areas of focus will Rigorous instruction and Collaborative Teachers. As we are moving towards a departmentalized model in grades 4 and 5 it will be necessary for the teachers of content (math, science, social studies) to improve their knowledge of their discipline on a deeper lever in order to impart correct information to students. Additionally, it will be equally important for teacher to collaborate across grades and subject areas in order to ensure coherence of curriculum and instruction. Additionally, since more teachers will be seeing the same students, it will be necessary for teachers to have time to discuss progress and analyze student work. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q079 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1136 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 26 25 36 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 18 21 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 53.0% % Attendance Rate 44.5% % Reduced Lunch 9.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 19.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 27.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.84 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 72.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 95 90 18 95.5% 8.0% 12.6% 0.5% 51.8% 1.0% 4 2% 5.9 70.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO NO N/A YES N/A YES NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of end of year math i-Ready data reveals the following:  Students across grades K-5 were assessed in five (5) mathematical strands o Number and Operations o Algebra and Algebraic Thinking o Measurement and Data o Geometry  Average of students below level across strands o Kindergarten: 28% o Grade 1: 34% o Grade 2: 25% o Grade 3: 21% o Grade 4: 24% o Grade 5: 30%  Average of students below level in each strand across grades o Number and Operations: 28% o Algebra and Algebraic Thinking: 25% o Measurement and Data: 27% o Geometry: 31% On the 2018 New York State Math test we saw a drop of 4% in the percentage of students reaching proficiency level 3 and 4. Included in that decrease is a 1% drop for students with disabilities and a 5% drop for English language learners. Priority focus will be on improving proficiency in the strand: Algebra and Algebraic Thinking Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  In order to improve mathematical outcomes across grades levels we will provide students strategically targeted instruction so that by June 2019 there will be a minimum 5% increase in the percentage of students performing on level in the strand Algebra and Algebraic Thinking as measured by i-Ready Diagnostic and Instruction. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Leaders All teachers will continue to receive on-going teacher professional development in specific pedagogical practices designed to improve conceptual understanding in mathematics instruction. Special education and ENL teachers will receive specific professional development in embedding Universal Design for Learning strategies as well as planning for multiple entry/access points for SWDs and ELLs. All K-3 teacher Grades 4 and 5 math teachers Special Education Teachers ENL teacher October 2018-December 2018 October 2018-December 2018 January 2019- May 2019 Targeted, differentiated professional learning for teachers in using the six (6) models of co-teaching to support access to the curriculum for students with disabilities ICT teachers in grades K-5 ENL teachers October 2018-January 2019 School Leaders SpEd and ENL personnel will also provide professional learning to classroom teachers so that they will have a toolbox of strategies to use in the absence of providers. Teachers will incorporate the use of explicit, direct instruction and Universal design for Learning principles to support the achievement of SWDs and ENLs in mathematics. All students will be progress-monitored in math 3x a year using diagnostic assessments from i-Ready. All K-3 teacher October 2018, February School Leaders 5  School leaders will monitor the effectiveness of the action plan by conducting classroom observations during math instruction, sitting in on teacher team meetings where math work is being analyzed and periodically collecting samples of student math work to determine if improvements are evident. Grades 4 and 5 math teachers 2019, May 2019 School Leaders October 2018, February 2019, May 2019 All K-3 teacher Grades 4 and 5 math teachers Special Education Teachers ENL teacher Parent Coordinator and selected teachers will provide interactive workshops to families so that they can experience math instruction in order to have an understanding of how to support their children at home. Parent Coordinator, Selected teachers October 2018- December 2018 School Leaders, Teacher Leaders School personnel will be used to translate for ENL/ELL parents and caretakers during PTC, meetings, and workshops. Trust: Transparency across all of the work that we do; parents and students in grades K-5 monitor student progress through the i-Ready program. School Leaders February 2019 - May 2019 October 2018- December 2019 March 2019 - May 2019 All K-3 teacher Grades 4 and 5 math teachers Special Education Teachers ENL teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be invited to attend on-going parent workshops that will be offered at key times during the school year from September 2018-June 2019 given by the administration, content specialists, FSC Instructional Leads, and classroom teachers. Specific curriculum nights for parents will be scheduled so that they can learn about our rigorous instructional focus and aligned materials. 6  Administrators, teachers and the parent coordinator will present to parents/families on a rotating/as-needed basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, Parent-Coordinator, Parents, Supervisors, Parents Association, Field Support Center Instructional Resources: Schedule Adjustments: Common Planning time, targeted time-frames, teacher lesson plans, Professional Learning Time (Diverse Learning Sessions), Go Math! Instructional Materials, Think Central. Per diem supplied by the FSC for teachers to attend professional learning cycles; per session allocated as needed for after school and Saturday planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students in grades K-5 will show a minimum of 2.5% progress towards scoring on level in the strand - Algebra and Algebraic Thinking as evidenced by a review of i-Ready assessment data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Our in house assessment system, i-Ready will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? While incidents are usually low, for the school year 2017-2018, a review of OORS data indicated a 2% increase in occurrences related to student behavior. These incidents usually take place during transition times, in the cafeteria and schoolyard. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to support students with their social growth, we will design and implement a social-emotional toolbox through which students will develop an awareness of the emotions that lead to frustration and incorporates a demonstration of self-management skills so that by June 2019 there will be a 5% reduction in the number of incidents as measured by the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Bi-monthly social emotional training for school staff to utilize the PS 79Q-created "Essential 12" elements of social-emotional awareness All teachers Form a teacher study group around the book – Lost at School – and the implementation of the Collaborative Problem Solving (CPS) strategy described within Selected teachers Parent/family volunteers Incorporate a yoga program with a focus on physical activity, emotional health and character development that will lead to improved social/emotional well-being of students Teachers, Students Design and train a group of students to serve as peer mediators Selected teachers, guidance counselor School Leaders, Guidance Counselor School Leaders Guidance Counselor School Leaders, Classroom Teachers Classroom Teachers Guidance Counselor September 2018 November 2018 January 2019 March 2019 May 2019 September 2018 November 2018 January 2019 March 2019 May 2019 September 2018 November 2018 January 2019 March 2019 May 2019 September 2018 November 2018 9  Utilize the Sanford Harmony Social Emotional teaching program in grades K-2 that will instruct students to communicate, cooperate, connect, embrace diversity, and resolve conflict Teachers in Grades PreK-2 School Leaders Guidance Counselor January 2019 March 2019 May 2019 September 2018 November 2018 January 2019 March 2019 May 2019 Character-development Read Alouds: Each month there will be a book selected school-wide focusing on one character virtue. Teachers will be responsible for reading, teaching, and responding to the virtue each month. School leaders will monitor the effectiveness of the action plan through classroom observations around the Framework for Teaching component 2d – managing student behavior – and a school created teacher survey to determine whether teachers feel positively about the improvements in the response to discipline challenges All Teachers September - School Leaders Guidance Counselor October 2018 November - December 2018 January - February 2019 March - April 2019 May - June 2019 All Teachers November School Leaders 2018 February 2019 April 2019 June 2019 September 2018 Meet the Teacher- May 2019 Meet the Teacher School Leaders, Classroom Teachers Trust: Transparency across all of the work that we do and fostering direct communication between teachers and family. Parents will be invited to celebrations involving outside partnerships. All teachers, students and parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/families will be provided with workshops to help them understand the city and school discipline policies. Parents are free to visit our school anytime during the day. On-Going Parent Engagement Workshops four times throughout the year provided by our staff as well as FSC: Queens North Family Nights: Sponsored by the PTA, Administration, and Staff throughout the school year: Fall: Book night, family yoga, and Painting Class. Winter: PJ Reading Night. Spring: STEM Events Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: School Leaders, Teachers, Guidance Counselor, Parents Instructional Resources: purchase of professional books, Technology, Surveys Schedule Adjustments will made accordingly to accommodate special events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019 there will be a minimum 2.5% reduction in the number of student behavior incidents as measured by the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data, Positive communication logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of end of year ELA i-Ready data reveals the following:  Students across grades K-5 were assessed in six (6) components of reading: o Phonological Awareness o Phonics o High-Frequency Words o Vocabulary o Comprehension (Literature) o Comprehension (Informational Text)  Average of students below level across strands o Kindergarten: 18% o Grade 1: 30% o Grade 2: 26% o Grade 3: 17% o Grade 4: 44% o Grade 5: 41%  Average of students below level in each strand across grades o Phonological Awareness: 12% o Phonics: 19% o High-Frequency Words: 9% o Vocabulary: 36% o Comprehension (Literature): 30% o Comprehension (Informational Text): 34% A review of New York State revealed a 3% increase in the percentage of students reaching proficiency levels 3 and 4. This includes a 2% increase for both students with disabilities and English language learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to strengthen our culture of collaboration and improve outcomes across grades levels we will design professional learning cycles that inform instruction and create opportunities to improve academic vocabulary across content areas so that by June 2019 there will be a minimum 5% decrease in the percentage of students performing 2  below level in the Vocabulary and Comprehension components as measured by the i-Ready Diagnostic and Instruction system. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school schedule will be organized to support common preps for each grade to meet/collaborate, deepen their knowledge of curriculum and develop plans to differentiate their instruction. All K-3 teacher August-September 2018 Administration TC Staff Developers Grades 4 and 5 math teachers September - December 2018 Special Education Teachers ENL teacher All K-3 teacher Grades 4 and 5 math teachers Special Education Teachers March -June 2019 October 2018 - November 2018 December 2018 - February 2019 ENL teacher School Leaders, Teacher Team Leaders School Leaders, Teacher Team Leaders March 2019 -May 2019 October 2018 - November 2018 December 2018 - Monday professional learning cycles will be designed to reflect the specific needs of teachers and students based on a review of applicable data. Purchase the CIPL resource Word Work and Word Play: A Practice Guide for Vocabulary Instruction K-12 for each teacher All K-3 teacher for a series of professional learning cycles centered around academic vocabulary instruction across content areas; collect student work to monitor increased use of academic vocabulary Grades 4 and 5 math teachers 4  Special Education Teachers February 2019 Teachers will be offered the opportunity to attend professional learning cycles from the Field Support Center. All K-3 teacher ENL teacher The vertical ELA teacher team will meet to review student work samples and determine next steps according to the i-Ready strands in most need. Grades 4 and 5 math teachers Special Education Teachers ENL teacher Teacher Leaders Partner with neighboring schools that are using the same curricular programs in order to design inter-school visits to share best practices; teams of teachers will share new learning with colleagues. Targeted teachers Send teachers for ongoing professional learning at Teachers College Targeted teachers School Leaders, QNFSC Teacher Team Leaders School Leaders Teacher Team Leaders School Leaders Teacher Team Leaders School Leaders, Teacher Team Leaders March 2019 -May 2019 October 2018 - November 2018 December 2018 - February 2019 March 2019 -May 2019 October 2018 - November 2018 December 2018 - February 2019 March 2019 -May 2019 October 2018 - November 2018 December 2018 - February 2019 March 2019 -May 2019 October 2018 - November 2018 December 2018 - February 2019 5  The impact of professional learning will be measured through formal and informal classroom observations; conversations with individual teachers regarding how they are incorporating the new learning into their practice; evidence in lesson plans of new strategies learned; collecting and analyzing samples of student work across content areas to determine an improvement in academic vocabulary usage. All Teachers and service providers Parent engagement: Parents will receive monthly calendars, newsletters, and invitations to parent workshops to keep them informed on what their children are learning. Additionally, we will continue to actively involve families by communicating at-home achievement strategies. Teachers, Parents Trust: Teachers will build trust with one another through weekly collaborations. Teachers will learn together through professional learning cycles and teacher led presentations. Teachers March 2019 -May 2019 October 2018 - November 2018 December 2018 - February 2019 March 2019 -May 2019 October 2018 - November 2018 December 2018 - February 2019 March 2019 -May 2019 October 2018 - November 2018 School leaders School Leaders, Teacher Team Leaders School Leaders Teacher Team Leaders December 2018 - February 2019 March 2019 -May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents/families will be invited to attend special presentations from teacher teams in order to observe the manner in which teachers collaboratively go about making decisions for their students and to model the use of data used to make those decisions. Parents will have the opportunity to interact with the teacher teams and ask questions regarding the process. 6  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: School Leaders, Parent Coordinator, FSC Instructional Resources: Scheduling and dedicated planning time for teachers, Teacher College Scheduling: Monthly Parent Calendars, Teacher Team Agendas Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be an overall 2.5% increase in the number of students on or above grade level across all strands as measured by the i-Ready Diagnostic and Instruction system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. i-Ready Diagnostic and Instruction System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to Advance, the average end of year rating in components 1a: Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy, 1e: Designing Coherent Instruction, and 3c: Engaging Students in Learning is as follows:  1a: 3.2 (effective)  1e: 3.2 (effective)  3c: 3.1 (effective) The average rating for these components was 3.1. However, there are individual teachers whose final numbers fell in the “Developing” range. While the ratings are high there is still a significant percentage of students who struggle to meet standards in mathematics. Our priority focus is to strengthen mathematics content knowledge and range of pedagogical skills of teachers so that student achievement improves in the strand – Algebra and Algebraic Thinking. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to ensure improvement in Algebra and Algebraic Thinking we will target a minimum of two (2) observation cycles to mathematics instruction so that by June 2019 there will be a minimum average of 3.5 in components 1a, 1e and 3c of the Danielson Framework for Teaching as measured by the Advance Teacher Development and Evaluation System. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional learning cycles designed to improve mathematics content knowledge and pedagogy Targeted intervisitations for teachers to observe peers engaged in effective mathematics instruction Targeted support for teachers who struggle with mathematical concepts Informal walkthroughs of classrooms to monitor effectiveness of professional learning Target Highly Effective math teachers to both open their classrooms to their colleagues as well as plan and facilitate targeted professional learning. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All K-3 classroom teachers Grades 4-5 math teachers All K-3 classroom teachers Grades 4-5 math teachers All K-3 classroom teachers Grades 4-5 math teachers All K-3 classroom teachers Grades 4-5 math teachers Selected teachers September 2018 - November 2018 January 2019 - March 2019 November 2018 January 2019 March 2019 November 2018 January 2019 March 2019 September 2018 - November 2018 January 2019 - March 2019 September 2018 - School Leaders, Math lead teachers FSC Instructional leads for mathematics School Leaders, Math lead teachers FSC Instructional leads for mathematics School Leaders, Math lead teachers FSC Instructional leads for mathematics School Leaders, Math lead teachers FSC Instructional leads for mathematics School leaders 9  Trust: To effectively foster a climate of trust, administrators will allow and encourage teachers to take a leadership role in organizing professional learning, organizing school wide events, organizing and leading parent workshops November 2018 January 2019 - March 2019 Teacher Leaders October 2018 Teachers School Leaders Teacher Leaders School Leaders December 2018 Teachers February 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will be invited to attend on-going parent workshops that will be offered at key times during the school year from September 2018-June 2019 given by the administration, content specialists, FSC Instructional Leads, and classroom teachers. Specific curriculum nights for parents will be scheduled so that they can learn about our rigorous instructional focus and aligned materials. Administrators, teachers and the parent coordinator will present to parents/families on a rotating/as-needed basis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: School Leaders, Teachers. Instructional Resources: Professional Study books, i-Ready, additional mathematics curriculum materials Schedule Adjustments: Professional Learning calendar, Common preps, Professional Development meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the average rating for teachers in components 1a, 1e, and 3c will increase by .2 to 3.3. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Teacher Development and Evaluation System aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Although the school scored above the district and citywide averages for Parent Involvement on the 2017-18 New York City School Survey, for the prompt – “families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school” – only 82% of parents responded “Sometimes” or “Often”. Our priority focus is to increase the number of parents who volunteer in the classrooms and at schoolwide events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to collaborate with families as full partners in the learning and development of their children we will improve communication regarding volunteer opportunities so that by June 2019 there will be a minimum 10% increase in the percentage of parents who report that they volunteer to support the school as measured by the New York City School Survey. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Partner with School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association and Parent Coordinator to form sub-committees of parents and school staff in order to study effective ways to encourage and include more parents to volunteer in the classrooms and at schoolwide events. Families September 2018 - October 2018 School Leaders PTA Members Parent Coordinator Conduct outreach to families through an online survey with a list of schoolwide events and other volunteer opportunities to determine at which types of events they would consider volunteering Families October 2018 - November 2018 Dedicate one (1) hallway bulletin board to showcase parents/family members who volunteer in the school Families Changed monthly - September 2018 - December 2018 January 2019 - May 2019 SLT Members School Leaders PTA Members Parent Coordinator SLT Members School Leaders PTA Members Parent Coordinator SLT Members School leaders will monitor the effectiveness of this plan through the analysis of the number and frequency of parents volunteering for events; feedback forms/surveys Families Cycles: School Leaders PTA Members Parent Coordinator SLT Members September 2018 -December 2018 3  January 2019 - April 2019 May 2019 -June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. n/a Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Salary to support parent coordinator. Additional funding for school events, permits, per session for teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase in the number and frequency of opportunities for parents to volunteer in classrooms and at schoolwide events so that there is a minimum of 5% increase in the number of parents responding “often” on a school-created survey regarding the opportunities to volunteer. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google survey to track the number and frequency of parents volunteering Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State Tests, Teacher Data i-Ready Assessments, Class Assessments Mathematics Science Social Studies State Tests, Teacher Data, i-Ready Assessments,Class Assessments State Tests, Teacher Data,Class Assessments Teacher Data,Class Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) RTI: Words Their Way. The program consists of: Phonemic awareness, word analysis, prosody and comprehension and coordination of reading and spelling instruction, cumulative instruction, and teaching for mastery. Focused Reading Intervention is designed to strengthen ELA skills TCWRP: One-to-one conferences in reading and writing. Math assistance designed for students having difficulty with understanding from simple to complex tasks using Go Math AIS materials. Instruction on grade level conceptual expectations. Instruction on grade level conceptual expectations. Small group, one on one During the school day Small group, one on one During the school day Small group, one on one During the school day Small group, one on one During the school day 5  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEP, Parent or Teacher Recommendation Services provided to assist children in understanding his/her school role in achieving at his/her highest potential. Small group, one on one During the school day 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7 In the event that we receive students in temporary housing we will will provide students with basic emergency supplies (e.g., uniforms, school supplies, books, glasses, etc.) and other educational services (e.g., counseling services, intervention programs) so that STH students have opportunities to progress academically. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 0  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [School name] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [School name] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 3  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) [School name] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement 4  between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 5  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 6  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 7  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The priority of our program is enhance learning for as well as intensify instruction for all levels of English Language Learners (ELLs). The program builds self-esteem in each targeted student by facilitating successful second language acquisition (listening, speaking, reading, writing). Students receive instruction in a holistic, fun and comfortable environment. Oral/aural communication is encouraged through the utilization of the expressive arts (music, dance, drama) in addition to role-play and total physical response. The involvement of ELLs in content-based experiential learning activities facilitates acquisition of academic language proficiency. Students are grouped by grade and English language proficiency. Students in third, fourth, and fifth grade are placed in a before school educational program with grade specific general education teachers. The certified ENL teachers in the building will rotate to all the morning sessions and spend 30 minutes with each group. All of the general education teachers collaborate with the ENL Certified teachers to discuss what lessons, strategies and methodologies should be used with these students. The focus of these sessions will be based on needs assessments i.e. State ELA Exams, NYSESLAT, CCLS Goals, TCRWP Assessments, iReady data, EDAT etc. This is also the data in which we use to form the program rationale and grouping of students. School administration and ENL teachers will sit prior to the start of the TITLE III program and look closely at the available data, from the assessments and reports listed above, and analyze which students will participate and how they will be grouped. As our school building does not have a large number of ELLs to teacher availability ratio, all ELLs will be provided the opportunity to participate in the TITLE III program. Students will be learning strategies to help them meet curriculum demands. When the two ENL certified teachers push in for the 30 minute rotations, the focus of instruction will shift to developing academic vocabulary and language. Title III sessions take place on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday mornings through January 3rd, 2018 through April 27th, 2018. This is a total of 38 sessions. Sessions will take place from 7:00-8:00am. Attendance for students will be taken by the teachers in the sessions and then maintained by the Vice Principal in the main office Title III program file. Additionally, in this folder, the ELL coordinator will maintain the original letters of program notification in both English and home language. The Translation and Interpretation Unit will assist in writing the letters. The approximate group size will be 10-20 students depending on the amount of ELLs in each grade. The utilized program provides targeted children an opportunity for extra help in a classroom setting. The language of instruction is English with home language supports (bilingual dictionaries, one to one translations, partnerships with same home language partner with higher level proficiency). Instructional strategies, activities and programs are being implemented to ensure the LEP students meet the standards and pass the required State assessments. These steps are in line with the NYS Dept. of Education Actions Steps for ELLs providing intensive English language instruction. TITLE III funds will be used for extending these methods in a before school program. ELLs are included in the read aloud, interactive read aloud and shared reading experience by using pictures, gestures and voice inflection to convert meaning, pointing to pictures and words as you read, dramatizing, providing realia and manipulatives, allowing students to respond non-0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information verbally to comprehension questions. Some ENL teaching techniques that include ELLs in the guided reading approach are: pre-teaching basic vocabulary, key phrases and concepts from selection by using realia, visuals, gestures and dramatization, "picture walks", "echo reading", finding clues for inferential questions. Also, ELLs are included in the independent reading experience by having available leveled library books, i.e., beginning books. Additional balanced literacy approaches include: reading partnerships and independent reading conference with the classroom teacher. Students will also be using Imagine Learning during our before school program, which funds will be allocated from the Title III budget. Additional funds from the TITLE III budget will be allocated in supplementing materials for Read Alouds, Guided Reading, and growing our bilingual and multicultural libraries. Supplemental reading materials are purchased mostly through Lee & Low publishers. In addition, Ready New York books by Curriculum Associates will be purchased to assist in preparing students for state exams. Lastly a portion of the budget will be allocated for to Educational Software for the Imagine learning program, which will be used as a supplemental resource during small group instruction. ESL methodologies are also integrated into the developing writing skills during our before school program. Some examples of this are using writing scaffolds for beginning ELLs like oral discussions, partner stories using pictures and wordless books, creating concept books, creating peek-a-boo stories or riddle books, pattern poems, from personal journals to buddy journals, and clustering. Strategies for intermediate writers include Show and Not Tell, sentence combining or shortening, sentence models, and mapping. During the Math Workshop Model, ESL methodologies like the use of manipulatives to reinforce learning , problem solving techniques, class room charts. Materials for this work will not be allocated from the Title III budget. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Three study group cycles are in place for the 2018-2020 school years to provide teams of teachers with collaborative ELL staff development. Each PD session will be approximately 45 minutes long. The providers of these PD sessions will be Mariella Barkouras, ENL certified pedagogue. In addition, a tentative professional development session will be provided by Amanda Hartman. Amanda Hartman is a NYU Teachers College Reading and Writing Project coach whom specializes in working with ELLs. She will provide professional development to the general education teachers who have ELLs in their classroom as well as the ELL teachers during the regular school day and/or Monday Professional Development hours. Her rate/cost is approximately $500. In November, the work of Maryanne Cuchiarra will be presented to the staff. In February, the topic of Advanced Literacy Hallmarks One and Two will be shared. In April, the topic of Advanced Literacy Hallmarks Three & Four will be shared. Professional texts will be used as the conduit of learning as well as professional articles will be distributed to staff in order to keep them apprised of latest trends and strategies for successful support of ELLs in and out of the classroom environment. In an effort to develop common instructional focus and a coherent school culture, professional collaborations will be supported through inter-visitations and time to study student and teacher work with the goal of improving instructional and student 1  Part C: Professional Development outcomes. As per the Chancellor's recommendations for ELLS, the program for ELLs will be aligned with the comprehensive core curriculum in mathematics and literacy. We will also keep staff apprised of the latest trends and strategies for successful support of ELLs both in and out of the classroom environment. All records of Professional Development will be kept in a binder maintained by the secretary in the main office. Records will include agendas and attendance. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: TITLE III funds will be used to help enrich our School Wide Parent Outreach Program. Our School Wide Parent Outreach program allows for parents to attend both academic and extra-curricular activity sessions every Tuesday of the month provided by classroom and out of classroom teachers. The ENL lead provides one ELL specific session once every four weeks. The topics of these sessions include instructional shifts for ELLs and computer based programs to support language development. In addition, some of the activities planned in our ELL parent outreach program include an informational session prior to the NYSESLAT test to give tips on preparing their children for the test. The tentative date for this meeting will be the Monday before April vacation in order to allow parents time to respond back during the week with additional questions. During the meeting we will familiarize with the test format and some strategies they can use at home. It should be noted that written notification of events provided to ELL parents are translated using the city's vendor for Translation and Interpretation Services. These documents are available in the nine city dominant languages including Chinese, Spanish, Korean, Arabic and Urdu. For parent's preferred language that is not provided by the city's vendor for Translation and Interpretation Services, notifications are sent home with a stamp stating the document has important information that needs to be translated. Funds to complete letters and provide interpretation will be allocated from the Translation and Interpretation budget. Additionally, we have members of school staff fluent in Spanish, Korean, Chinese, and Greek if needed during parent activities. For all other needs the school uses the Translation and Interpretation call line for assistance. All engagement activities will take attendance and record of outreach, attendance, and agendas will be maintained by the ELL coordinator. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $10493.70  Per session  Per diem 2 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 190 hours of per session of ESL and General Ed teacher to support ELL students: 190 x $55.23  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. (current teacher per session rate with fringe) = $10493.70 Professional Development Session with Amanda Hartman Purchased services  High quality staff $500 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. $373 Books (guided reading, read alouds, and multi-cultural) and Ready New York books Educational Software (Object Code 199) $1664 Travel Other TOTAL $0 $0 $14030 Renewal Fee of Imagine Learning Educational Software 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Francis Lewis Elementary Borough Queens School Number 79 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal George D. Carter Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mariella Barkouras Teacher/Subject Area Cara Patalano Teacher/Subject Area Alicia Feyjoo Related-Service Provider Rena Gombo Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Marybeth Grimpel Coach School Counselor Michela Belfiore Parent Holly Hill Parent Coordinator Jennifer Fertile Field Support Center Staff Member Meesun John Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1065 4 Total number of ELLs 71 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.67%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) NA NA NA NA NA 1 NA 4 NA 3 NA 2 NA K NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 NA 6 NA 7 NA 8 NA 9 NA 10 NA 11 NA 12 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses a range of data to monitor ELLs and former ELLs (FELLs). Literacy skills are monitored using TCRWP Assessments: running records, concepts of print, on demand assessments, iReady assessments, state ELA and Math exams, NYSESLAT and NYSITELL exam scores. This data provides insights into math, reading comprehension, phonics and decoding, writing, listening and speaking skills of ELLs. Teachers use this data to differentiate instruction through guided reading groups, strategy lessons, and one-to-one conferencing. Teachers in the upper grades use the above assessments to monitor progress and guide instruction for ELL and FELL students. At this time we do not use ELL Periodic Assessments. Close examination of the NYSESLAT scores allow us to see what sub-areas of literacy the students need additional help, which allows us to shape our instructional plans as well. Examination of these assessments show that ELLs are in need of improvement in writing structures, including the needed use of more academic language in sentence structure and vocabulary. In reading, ELLs also need improvement in understanding academic language in context and accurately identifying main idea and details. 5  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support the efforts of using formative assessment and curriculum-embedded assessments to guide instructional planning for our ELLs, teachers work collaboratively on many different levels. Grade meetings are held weekly, inquiry teams meet approximately twice a month, and vertical ELL team meetings take place monthly. This opportunities allow for teachers to closely examine and discuss assessments given to drive current instruction and adjust future curriculum. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate the success of our program for ELLs, we use data from assessments like the NYS assessments (NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, and Science), TCRWP assessments, Performance Based assessments, iReady assessments, and portfolio assessments as well as track student development through individual portfolios. Progress is measured in November, January, March, and June. Areas of need using last years measures include academic vocabulary and main idea and details for ELA and measurement and data in Math. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? In order to address interventions needed for our ELLs once summative data has been gathered, teachers and administration, support staff, and School Leadership Team meet to "Data Dive" or examine results. By taking these "Data Dives", administration and select staff are able to share out baselines, progress and areas of need to the whole school during Updates and Sharing every week or Professional Development Staff Days. In addition, we have an RtI team who meets monthly to discuss individual student needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The foundation of RtI for ELLs begins with strengthening the core instruction in Tier 1 to support language and literacy development. Teachers focus on building upon and expanding ELLs existing oral language competencies to support literacy learning and content knowledge. In Tier 1, instruction is focused on teaching specialized vocabulary as well as elements of academic language. Building such conceptual language skills is essential for ELLs to succeed in academic settings. Core instruction will promote oral language development that is necessarily rich in both language and content. We incorporate text-based content learning in interactive experiences that promote academic conversation and knowledge building. Strategies that promote ELLs' oral language development are explicitly planned and incorporated throughout the school day. Some of these strategies are: building background knowledge, previewing key concepts and vocabulary, close interactive reading aloud, engaging students in discussion and dialogue about a big idea in the text, collaborative discussion and debate, role playing and rehearsed oral performance, multifaceted and intensive vocabulary instruction including vocabulary learning strategies such as using visual cues and total physical response, and jointly constructed extended writing. Based on assessment data, some ELLs who have been provided high-quality instruction in Tier 1 may still have trouble demonstrating adequate progress in targeted skills and competencies. These ELLs will be selected to receive targeted interventions in Tier 2 during the school day. In this tier, classroom teachers support students through differentiated instruction and research based modification from the Pre-Referral Intervention Manuel. In addition to this, ELLs are offered additional target, small group support with the AIS provider. During AIS instruction, ELLs are offered extra-literacy instruction that focuses on improving comprehension skills and reading ability as well as differentiated instruction in mathematics. ELLs who have been provided with high quality instruction in Tier 1 and targeted interventions in Tier 2 may still have trouble demonstrating adequate progress in targeting skills and competencies. Our school offers these students Special Education Teacher Support Services provided to at risk students during the school day. This push in and pull out program provides students with extra support in learning. ELLs participate in Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshops with the direct assistance of the ENL teacher. The workshop model has differentiation embedded within the curriculum through the use of think-aloud, guided practice, teacher modeling, individual conferences, etc. During the balanced literacy block and pull out ENL sessions, ELLs participate in accountable talk using strategies such as think-pair-share and brainstorming. At these times, guided reading groups are also 6  facilitated by the ENL teachers and classroom teachers. In these guided reading groups, an emphasis is placed upon concept acquisition through social interaction. ELL students are encouraged to explore new vocabulary, attempt oral communication and clarify knowledge through the exchange of ideas with a reading partner. During reading activities, the ENL and classroom teachers model good reading strategies such as re-reading for detail, predicting and clarifying unknown words through the use of think aloud strategies. In addition, ELLs are taught to look for picture and context clues to find and support meaning of text, develop and use graphic organizers to organize ideas, and to "talk to the text" to monitor his/her comprehension. Emphasis is placed on sentence structure, tense usage, and vocabulary. Through word work, the ENL teacher pre-selects and pre-teaches new vocabulary, points out new usages of familiar words and teaches ELL students synonyms as well as idioms. The ENL teacher uses strategies such as a vocabulary circle and concept maps to promote the development of new vocabulary. Personal dictionaries are also developed by ELL students. During writing workshop, ELLs are also explicitly taught writing strategies and skills that will help them improve their English language skills as well as their writing techniques. Concept maps are used as a pre-writing tool. ELL students use these maps to organize thinking and brainstorm ideas before writing. ELL students are also taught to use elaboration prompts to add volume to their writing. ELL students also use personal dictionaries during writing time to strengthen vocabulary skills. Our school uses GO MATH! and Exemplars which offers opportunities for differentiation through use of games, manipulatives and group projects which are based upon skills and level. ELLs master scientific literacy by modeling scientific methods of investigation through a "hand-on" approach workshop model that is supported by the FOSS science program. This model of study includes collaborative learning, student discourse and embedded assessment. Following the NYC Science Scope & Sequence and the NYC Social Studies Scope & Sequence, ELLs are supported by the use of children's literature, classroom social studies library, and trade books. Assignments for ENL students are modified through the use of word banks, thinking maps, and picture cues. Field trips, school sponsored presentation and cultural organization, also, enhance social studies curriculum and the learning of ELLs. ENL instruction is differentiated for ELL subgroups. For newcomers (students with less than three years in the US school system) ENL instruction focuses heavily on the acquisition of BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills) in addition to the methods mentioned above. Newcomers are immersed in language rich activities throughout the school day. Assignments are modified for these students using word banks, picture cues, and concept maps. Newcomers are paired with a class buddy, preferable one who speaks the same native language. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher meet frequently to monitor progress for these students as well as modify and adjust lessons and classroom activities. For students with 4-6 years of ENL instruction, the focus of ENL instruction shifts to the acquisition of CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency). Based upon NYSESLAT results, ENL instruction emphasizes the areas of reading and writing. ELL students in the subgroup will be asked to think, talk, read and write about content in addition to the methods listed above. At this time, we have no Long-Term English Langauge Learners or SIFE students. In the case that a SIFE student is admitted into our school, there are systems in place to offer that student additional instructional support from the ESL teachers. ELLs with special needs receive daily phonics and word work instruction through the Wilson-based "Fundations" program in addition to the methods listed above. The classroom teacher utilizes concept maps across the curriculum to promote acquisition of these skills. The ENL teacher, who is also certified in Special Education, modifies lessons using strategies such as repetition of instruction, reduced task length and shortened direction to meet the needs of students in this sub-group. Throughout the RtI framework, our school uses assessment data to measure the needs of students. RtI providers use progress monitoring data to determine whether students need an additional cycle of RtI or should be referred for a special education evaluation. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Patterns in proficiency levels for the NYSESLAT reveal that ELLs in our school score predominately in the Expanding (Advanced) on all grade levels, the highest amount of Expanding students in Grade 1. The lowest amount of Expanding students in is Grade 5, however, this grade has low number of ELLs as well. All of the ELLs in the Entering, Emerging and Transitioning proficiency levels are newcomers with less than 2 years of services. When breaking down the NYSESLAT modalities are ELLs in lower 7  grades (K-2) scored well in Listening and Writing sub-tests and could use improvement in Reading and Speaking sub-tests. The ELLs in upper grades (3-5) scored well on Writing, Reading and Speaking sub-tests and could use improvement on Listening. Data patterns across performance and grade levels show that 29% of our current ELLs (excluding current Kindergarten ELLs) did not meet the commanding level by a small span of points in the raw score. These students scored commanding in each sub-test, however, the total score placed them in the Expanding level, not Commanding. The NYSESLAT Individual Student Reports and SIRS reports were examined closely to determine areas of strengths and weaknesses for ELLs. The ENL coordinator examined the data and shared information with administration and classroom teachers of ELLs. The outcome of these assessments data is used to evaluate how the school is meeting the needs of ELLs and areas in which the school can improve on meeting the ELLs needs. Specifically, it informs instruction within the ELL programs. Each content teacher and ELL provider on each grade use the data to determine what areas of need the grade level/class needs and what implication that has on their instruction and time working together. For example, third grade struggles with understanding academic vocabulary in context on the ELA exam. Therefore, the content and ELL provider are working together to incorporate strategies within the Social Studies curriculum that help students tackle vocabulary. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to disseminate and inform Kindergarten through Fifth grade school staff and educators of the above findings, the ENL coordinator and administration will present NYSESLAT and ELA & Math state scores during a Data Dive on staff development days in the beginning of the school year. In addition, the teachers working directly with ELLs/FELLs will have additional time during school Monday professional development hours to examine the data closely in order to make adjustment to programs and curriculum. During this inquiry work time, a team of teachers representing different grade levels and positions, ICT, RtI, ENL, primary grades, etc., will look closely at individual students who are at risk of becoming Long Term ELLs. These meeting will help determine best practices that will later be taken in to consideration when re-writing curriculum maps and lesson plans across all grade levels. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction of ELLs is delivered through an Integrated ENL classes, where co-teaching takes place, as well as Stand-Alone ENL classes to meet the needs of our students and NYS regulations. In the Integrated ENL settings/model, students of the same grade level, but different proficiency levels, are grouped together and are receiving instruction in content areas. The majority of the students in the Integrated ENL model setting are in their home classroom with minimal amounts of students who are brought in from other classrooms, if necessary. The students levels range from Entering, Emerging, Transition, Expanding, and Commanding. There are two teachers facilitating instruction- Common Branch and TESOL certification. During Stand-Alone classes, students are banded together in either Kindergarten and First grade, Second and Third grade, and Fourth and Fifth grade. Students in this setting are Entering and Emerging levels and receive instruction from one teacher who is TESOL certified. The students come from their individual rooms and meet in designated room for instruction. All ELLs are held to rigorous academic standards and will receive the mandated number of hours in all subject areas including ENL instruction. The ENL coordinator uses the results of the NYSITELL, as well as, the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) to determine the amount of minutes of ENL Integrated and Stand-Alone ENL instruction. 8  Formal and informal assessments (i.e. TC assessment reading levels, performance tasks, state exams, etc) will be used to develop and deliver content-area based lessons using ENL methodology and teaching strategies. Lessons will be designed to promote critical thinking, problem solving, and effective communication through oral and written language. One way teachers differentiate learning for ELLs, is through the development of learning goals that address student needs in each subject are based on analysis of student assessment data. Collaboration between the classroom teacher and the ENL teachers will ensure ENL students receive instruction aligned with the NYS learning standards and Common Core Learning Standards in all academic core subjects. The ENL teachers and classroom teachers work collaboratively to strengthen and expand speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills of all ELLs. Together they collaborate to plan explicit lessons that teach content, specific skills, and strategies that meet student needs based on formal and informal assessments. ENL strategies include Total Physical Response (TPR), whole language, small group and individual instruction, working with computers (graphic representation), pictorial and realia support, manipulatives, and scaffolding to support new learning. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? With collaboration from the principal, assistant principals, ENL teachers, Special Education team members, and general education classroom teachers, our staff is able to plan accordingly in each program model. Each student is scheduled per individual level to an Integrated model and/or Stand-Alone model classroom to meet the mandated minutes. Students whose levels are Entering and Emerging receive four 45 minutes sessions in a Integrated ENL content study model per week. Additionally, these students receive four 45 minute sessions in a Stand-Alone ENL unit of study per week. Students whose levels are Transitioning and Expanding receive four 45 minute sessions in a Integrated ENL content study model per week. Students whose level is Commanding receive two 45 minute sessions in a Integrated ENL content study model per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All push-in/integrated ENL units of study take place during Reading or Writing blocks. However, the reading and writing context is often aligned to topics covered in Social Studies and Science. To ensure that ELLs are provided with an opportunity to enrich language development, ENL methodologies are infused into general instruction. Examples are literacy blocks and scaffolding, providing picture support, modified language in materials to help ensure understanding, differentiation, etc. The Teachers College Reading and Writing Project model and materials are used as well. Turn and Talk strategies are used to allow ELLs time to speak and also for teacher provided instant feedback. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since our school does not have a dual-language or TBE program, native language assessments are only used for state assessments in which we are provided with copies of the native language. The GO MATH! Curriculum does provide supports and tests in Spanish and if teachers deem it appropriate and beneficial for the students, they will use accordingly. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 9  We currently do not have SIFE students, however if met within the year with a newly registered SIFE student the student would be integrated into instruction and planning with the Entering leveled students. Within those classrooms, the student would be provided with differentiated instruction and activities that would allow them to begin building language again. We would use audio books, Bridges to Academic Success SIFE Project program tools and Internet ELL sites to support the needs of the student. For ELLs in US schools less than three years (newcomers) we will use the same ENL methodologies mentioned earlier. In addition, in preparing them for the state ELA test we will concentrate on building the students' Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP) where a heavy emphasis on content area vocabulary is in place. We currently do not have ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service, however, we would focus instruction primarily on building academic language. We also do not have Long Term ELLs in our program, however, if faced with a student who is, we plan to use certain instruction that supports state standardized tests. Within this instruction we will teach the student specific strategies needed to help during the test and in regular classroom learning. For Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status, the school provides two periods of integrated model services. Instruction is differentiated to meet the needs of these students based off of data collected in the classroom and from state measures. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade-level materials are in place for ELL-SWDs. ENL methodologies are used in conjunction with programs like Fundations, Teachers College Reading & Writing workshops, the Wilson Model, etc. ELL-SWDs are also placed in a classroom where the certified Special Education teacher is available as either a co-teaching model or support. There is also constant collaboration with the Special Education teachers to ensure both ENL and SPED methodologies and strategies are in place. In addition, the Pre-Referral Intervention Manual (PRIM) is readily available and used to help find appropriate strategies for ELL-SWDs. Additional materials include student leveled books and a leveled library, Imagine Learning and iReady lessons available in all classrooms. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school pays particular attention to curricular, instruction, and scheduling flexibility that enables ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. All ELL-SWDs are provided with a curricular that they can access with instruction that includes differentiation and Universal Design for Learning. Scheduling of ENL services for ELL-SWDs is also flexible so that the student is supported during content area instruction and so that the student does not miss any additional services in accordance to his or her IEP like Speech, Occupational Therapy, Guidance, etc. Also, ELL-SWDs have access to all special cluster classes and are not pulled for ENL services during these times. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math, and other core content areas available in our school include AIS services, before and after-school programs, RtI Tier I, Tier II and Tier III, Children Study Teams and targeted instructional programs before and after school through Title III funding. All of these programs are offered in English. These targeted intervention programs are provided for all subgroups of ELLs including Newcomers, Expanding and Commanding ELLs, and ELLs with IEPs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? School Wide trends show a need in ELA around main idea and language standards, specifically, literal and non literal meanings of words, metaphors, figurative language, and idioms. With continuous professional development on Universal Design for Learning (UDL), our building is providing access for all learners, including ELLs and SWDs. In addition, we are working on having classrooms adopt more bilingual/native language supports and approaches to ensure multiple entry points for speakers of other languages. Also, each classroom has developed their own data driven goal that surrounds language standards and are incorporating different teaching practices and methodologies into lessons to meet the need of the school wide data. For example, teachers are spending more time zooming into language standards to read alouds. 0  Lastly, we have two new programs, Imagine Learning and iReady which provide data that drives small group instruction based on the exact areas of academic need for individual learners. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not have and/or had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs as they are included in cluster programs during the school day including science, music, dance, library hours, theater, and technology classes. In addition, they are afforded equal access to our elective art programs, clubs, and after school sport programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials include but are not limited to: bilingual texts, native language translation services, multicultural texts, iPads, iReady, Imagine Learning, smart boards, computer labs, elective arts programs, and after school programs. We also offer parent workshops to support parents and students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? As mentioned earlier, an improvement initiative we are taking school wide is utilizing a UDL methodologies in our classrooms. Universally designing instruction for ELLs as well as all our learners will ensure they have access into the curriculum. In order to do this, honoring the use of the children's native language is essential. As often as possible and with proper technology if needed, teachers use learners' native language to clarify instructions so that all students remain engaged. Additionally, teachers may ask one or two students to help another student who speaks the same language so that students can negotiate meaning together. Also, writing and reading is accepted in native language in beginning language acquisition stages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of the required services/resources support correspond to the individual ELLs proficiency level and grade level. For example, all Kindergarten ELLs (all levels) are clustered and receiving the 180 minutes of content services together in a Integrated setting. All Kindergarten ELLs who are Entering or Emerging are receiving and additional 180 minutes of services together in a Stand Alone setting. This model is carried through all grades K-5. In addition, Stand Alone setting are grade and age appropriate as classes are grouped with not more than a two grade bridge. Stand Alone services are grouped Kindergarten and First, Second and Third, Fourth and Fifth. In the Integrated setting, only students in that grade are serviced, therefore effectively supporting ELLs in a grade and age appropriate manner. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does not have collocation however, within our school building we share amongst grades and classrooms instructional materials if need be. This includes but is not limited to: bilingual texts, native language translation services, multicultural texts, and iPads. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). For students who enroll in our school in the beginning of the school year, during the process of filling out the Home Language Identification Survey, a certified pedagogue has the opportunity to discuss the possibility of the student being enrolled in ENL services thus allowing the parents to ask any questions. This is true for students who enroll later in the school year as well. In addition, new students whom enroll throughout the school year are allotted time to adjust in the classroom and teachers are cognizant of this period. Also, these students are welcomed into the school building with a tour by an administrator or school staff to help them get acquainted with the building. The parent coordinator and/or ENL teacher follows up with parents as well to see how he/she may assist the family any further. 1  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not offered at our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL staff receive continuing professional development through workshops provided by our Borough Field Office and in-house professional developments. The ENL teachers will also attend workshops offered by Teachers College Inclusive Classrooms Project to explore ways to value and welcome ELLs to the classroom in authentic ways by connecting to principals of Universal Design for Learning. The ENL teachers will attend all other applicable workshops provided by the DOE. Listed below are the dates of the Borough Field Office Professional Development Series that each of the ESL teachers will be attending. Teacher's College Inclusive Classroom Project- TBD Queens North Borough Field Office Academic Research Rounds- TBD The Teacher's College workshop is entitled TBD The content of the Academic Research Rounds includes academic language, unpacking vocabulary, text complexity, SIFE, disciplinary literacy, language acquisition vs. language disability, RTI for ELLs, and oral language unpacked. Classroom teachers receive differentiated professional development to support instructional learning environments for ELLs. The ENL teachers regularly meets with classroom teachers to discuss student needs, plan lessons, and set appropriate learning goals for ELLs with ENL strategies that develop content area skills. Last year, several teachers received training from Borough Field Office coach that focused around improving and building academic language for ELLs. This work continues this year through teacher inquiry team work. Teacher inquiry teams meet weekly and study methodologies to support ELLs under the guidance of the ENL teachers. In March, a faculty conference will be devoted to providing teachers an understanding of the demands of the NYSESLAT. In addition, on-site support from the ENL teachers focuses on the building of academic language that will help ELLs experience success as they transition. Para-professionals also attend professional development on Election Day and Chancellor's Conference Day. School Aides meet monthly with administration where administration provides tips and guidance on how to meet the needs of English Language Learners outside of the classroom. The ENL Coordinator and school guidance counselor work with administration to provide best practices and further information to inform the meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2, 15% of total professional development hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for ENL teachers will be ELL-specific. This entails three turn key sessions of professional development attendance by ENL teacher Mariella Barkouras. Topic of these turn keys for all staff is listed above. These turn key sessions will take place in November, February, and April. Specific dates are TBD however they will take place on a Monday afternoon. All pedagogues have completed Jose P. training or coursework that meets Jose P. requirements. The school maintains proof of completed training hours. Records, which are sign in sheets and agendas, are maintained by administration in a binder available in our main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas weekly on Tuesday afternoons. These meetings are scheduled accordingly to the progress and need of the student. During these meetings Language and Interpretation Services may be contacted if needed to ensure that communication will be clear. Parents are notified of said meeting through written notice followed by phone calls home by the ENL teacher. All meetings with parents, at the request of the parent or suggestion of the teacher, will utilize the contracted translation and interpretation services or interpreters available in the school building. If the parent chooses to bring an interpreter with him/her, the person must be over 18 years of age. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All our ELL parents are included in our mainstream parent activities. Listed below are some of our in-house parent involvement activities: -ELL Parent Orientation (Sept) -Curriculum Orientation (Sept) -Marquis Studio Family Events (Fall/Spring) -Parent Teacher Conferences -School Sponsored Workshops (i.e. MS application process, School Safety, Test Prep) -PTA Meetings -Writing Celebrations -Coffee and Conversations with the Principal -Music/Arts Festivals -Multicultural School Events -Family Fitness Nights (Fall/Spring) -NYSESLAT Workshops (Spring) -Annual Individual Meetings (Ongoing) ELL parents participate in all school events and functions. 3  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, George Carter, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Francis Lewis Elem School DBN: 25Q079 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) George Carter Title Principal Marybeth Grimpel Assistant Principal Jennifer Fertile Parent Coordinator Mariella Barkouras ENL/Bilingual Teacher Holly Hill Parent Cara Patalano Teacher/Subject Area Alicia Feyjoo Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Coach Coach Michela Belfiore School Counselor Danielle DiMango Meesun John NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 NA NA 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q079 School Name: Francis Lewis Elementary Superintendent: Danielle DiMang The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mariella Jennifer Barkouras Fertile LAC & ENL Coordinator Yes Parent Coordinator No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess the language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication, the school reviews pertinent information culled from Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), ATS reports, Student Emergency Contact cards, and any additional surveys conducted by our school. In order to keep track of these language preferences, the pupil personnel secretary ensures that proper information is transferred from the parent/student registration process into ATS as well as kept on file. The LAC coordinator monitors the language preferences of the parent community using the information culled and ensures that important outreach to parents can be made available in coinciding home languages. In addition, the LAC coordinator works closely with the Parent Coordinator to ensure that parents are well informed of the Language and Interpretation services available. 7  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Bengali Cantonese Chinese/Any Dari/Farsi/Persian Greek Italian Korean Mandarin English Pashto Spanish Urdu Ukrainian 2 1 0 311 1 2 1 65 0 862 1 59 4 0 .15 .08 0 23.76 .08 .15 .08 4.97 0 65.85 .08 4.51 .31 0 2 1 3 291 1 0 1 62 24 844 1 62 4 1 .15 .08 .23 22.31 .08 0 .08 4.74 1.83 64.48 .08 4.74 .31 .08 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Chinese, Any and English are the top two preferred languages at our school. Both are over 10%. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents our school typically disseminates every year that require translation are parent handbooks, newsletters, calendars, Parent Handbooks and calendars are All of these documents are 8  parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information, New York State testing dates, general overview of student curriculum, letters from the school leadership. distributed to Families in September of the school year. Parent- Teacher Conference Announcements are distributed in November, January, and May. After-school program information is distributed in January. School Leadership letters are sent on an ongoing, needs-based time line. Newsletters are published on the school website monthly. stamped with notice that translation and interpretation of the contents of the letter is available by request of the parent. The stamp includes this verbiage in English, Chinese, Korean, Spanish. In addition, when letters are specific to parents/families needing translation- Mariella Barkouras, the Language Access Coordinator works with staff and administration to request translated documents through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Once the letters are created from T&I Unit, the school works to provide the letters in home language and English copies to the parents. 9  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Formal face-to-face meetings our school typically has with parents throughout the school year includes Meet the Teacher/Curriculum night and three parent-teacher conference days and nights. In addition, every Tuesday of the school week there is time allotted for teachers to hold meetings with parents. These meetings can be scheduled to discuss behaivor, academic progress, etc.. November 2017 January 2018 May 2018 Ongoing Parent Engagement Hours on Tuesday afternoons between 2:30 and 3:15pm. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? If the language needed to communicate with parents face to face is either Chinese, Greek or Spanish the school provides in house staff to help with translation. These staff members are Jin Yip, Mariella Barkouras, and Celmira Cintron. If one of these staff members is not available, teachers call the the Translation and Interpretation Unit line and use a translator over the phone specifically on Tuesday afternoons. For Parent Teacher conferences, we use The 0  Big Word and hire translators in Chinese and Korean to assist parents and teachers. If Greek or Spanish is needed, staff members Mariella Barkouras and Celmira Cintron are present. For any of the languages that are not part of the T&I Unit top 9 languages, staff communicates with the family to bring a family member or friend to help with interpretation. For example, the family of the Sinhalese speakers in our school come with a relative to help during parent teacher conferences. In some instances, we have to ability to reach out to The Big Word. 1  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school has a robo-call and text message system we use to contact parents for school-wide emergencies. For individual student emergencies, if the family is limited-English-proficient, we use staff members in Chinese, Spanish and Greek and/or the T&I unit phone services. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator, Mariella Barkouras, provides Professional Development to staff in the beginning of the year to remind staff of the available services provided by the T&I Unit and the Chancellor's Regulation A-663. During the PD, data of our school community is shared and the video provided from Language Access Coordinator Gar Yan Yeung, is shown to staff. In addition, all staff members have a stack of the Parent Language Access brochures in their classroom to reference if needed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school fulfills parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by obtaining all notification requirements in the school building such as, Welcome Poster, Parents' Bill of Rights, Parents' Guide to Language Access, Language ID Guide at security desk and main office. We also ensure that parents with Limited English Proficiency are provided equal access to meaningful opportunities ensuring their participation in the child's education, school programs, and services. We do this by ensuring that minors do not provide translation services but rather trained professionals and/or adults over the age of 18 do so. Lastly, our Parent Coordinator receives training from the Language and Interpretation Unit to keep abreast of language access requirements. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school gathers feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services from the parent survey. In addition, during parent-teacher conferences teachers and administration elicit informal feedback from parents to ensure that their language needs are met. In addition, the School Leadership Team (SLT) is working on creating a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in the school to gather feedback and best practices on communicating with families. This will be discussed at the November SLT Meeting. 2 
