 26Q094 School Name: P.S. 094 DAVID D. PORTER Principal: LAURA AVAKIANS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The David D. Porter School 26Q094 342600010094 K-5 School Number (DBN): 41-77 Little Neck Parkway, Little Neck, NY 11363 718-423-8491 Phone Number: 718-423-8531 Fax: Laura Avakians Iavakians@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Laura Avakians Wendi Aronson JanelDoddo Lynn Leon N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 26 Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside, NY 11364 Danielle Giunta Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: dgiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-631-6943 Fax: 718-631-6996 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: QPN Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, LIC, NY 11101   Executive Director’s Email Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-391-8222 Fax: 718-391-8320   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Laura Avakians Wendi Aronson JanelDoddo Elizabeth Valente Lynn Leon Jeri Strohschein *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Kang Stacy Maldonado Amanda Li Olga Fokas Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission at PS 94 is to foster collaboration among parents, students and staff to enrich the learning experience of each child through high expectations, academic rigor and a "thinking" curriculum. In an atmosphere rich with cultural diversity, we provide a differentiated program of instruction that sets the highest standards for all our children while celebrating individuality and encouraging creativity. We are preparing them to meet the academic and technological challenges of both the present and future. Our entire school community endeavors to be lifelong learners, socially responsible citizens and unique individuals.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The David D. Porter School is an elementary school with about 310 students from kindergarten through grade 5 located in the Little Neck neighborhood of Queens. The school population comprises 4% Black, 20% Hispanic, 17% White, and 56% Asian students. Boys account for 52% of the students enrolled and girls account for 48%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-18 was 97%. PS 94 offers a variety of enrichment/extracurricular activities such as, Suzuki violin, Glee Club, Art/OT Club, STEM Club, Student Council, Lego Robotics, Chorus, Musical Theater residence, Running Club, Recycling Squad, Bricks4Kidz, Coding classes, after school residencies and more. We have also established collaborations / partnerships with community organizations, such as, North Shore Animal League, March of Dimes Walk-a-thon, American Heart Association, SNAP, Queens College, Alley Pond Environmental Center, New York Road Runners, RoboMindTech and Bricks 4Kidz. During the 2017-18 SY, the school leader and staff have put a strong process in place to regularly evaluate and adjust curricular and instructional practices in response to student learning needs and the expectations of the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS). One of the key areas of focus at PS 94 for the 2018-19 SY will be to increase student performance of students with IEP's and students learning English. Additionally, we will continue to engage students in social emotional lessons throughout the school year using the Sanford Harmony curriculum. We will incorporate the CASEL principles and the Mood Meter from kindergarten to fifth grade. We will continue to provide our students with the Next Generation Standards aligned curriculum, that utilized Ready Gen, Words their Way, Fundations, Teachers College for Reading and Writing Project, Passport to Social Studies and Go Math. This school year we will adopt the new science curriculum, Amplify. Finally, PS 94 will continue to focus on improving communication between the school and parents regarding student progress, as well as increasing parent involvement in school events and as volunteers to support the school community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The student body is experiencing an increase in the English language learners and Special Education departments. At this time the breakdown is 11% English language learners and 15% special education students. As we gear up for 2018-2019, we are planning Integrated Co-teaching classrooms from kindergarten through fifth grade levels, including part time Self Contained classroom settings. We will continue to support students with a Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) provider, Speech teacher, Occupational Therapist, Social Worker, Hearing Teacher, Physical Therapist, Guidance Counselor and a School Psychologist. 0  Our current and former English Language Learners will be serviced by a full time ENL teacher as well as an experienced ENL teacher twice a week. Additionally, our kindergarten and first grade students will use Fundations to strengthen their decoding skills. Our paraprofessionals will use Great Leaps to work with our students who need support with fluency and decoding. In most classrooms, all learners are speaking in front of their peers and participating fully. Some teachers will also be trained in Student Based Individualization (DBI) progress monitoring. Teachers provide supports in the form of charts, sentence starters to meet students at their entry points, accountable talk prompts, scaffolded learning and varied forms of the flipped classroom learning. As a result the students are engaged in the learning taking place and produce meaningful work products. In order to increase student engagement with the math curriculum, our students with IEP's in the Self Contained classroom will utilize ABii the robot to deliver one to one math instruction using expressive and personalized instruction. Abii offers support, encouragement, and tracks progress for the user. Our English language learners and students with disabilities will also engage in weekly computer science for all lessons and STEM projects. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Overall, we have made great progress in all of the elements of the Framework for Great Schools. However, one area that we are proud of would be Strong Family Community Ties. According to the School Quality Guide, the rating for Strong Family-Community Ties increased from 4.13 in 2016 to 4.32 in 2018. Over the last year, we have provided many opportunities for parents and surrounding community to engage with our school. From workshops, to student led shows, to translated versions of materials, to participating in local drives, our students and parents have been deeply involved in our school. According to the New York City School Survey there was a 91% favorable response rate in Parent/Principal Trust. One key area of focus for this year will continue to be Supportive Environment for all, staff, students and parents. We will focus our efforts on increasing cultural awareness and sensitivity through social emotional learning and bias awareness learning. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q094 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 328 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 50.0% % Attendance Rate 41.2% % Reduced Lunch 9.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 19.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 81.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 100% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 29 29 12 96.5% 8.5% 14.9% 4.3% 56.7% 2.7% 0 4% 9.1 84.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 94Q, the David D. Porter's overarching emphasis on the Framework for Teaching and engaging students in learning helps us organize an approach to curriculum centered on challenging content and complex thinking. The goal below based on the Framework For Great Schools-was developed over the course of the school year in consultation with staff, horizontal and vertical meetings, parents, and students whereby the nature of "rigorous learning" at 94Q was assessed through meetings, inquiry meetings, professional development sessions and faculty conferences. The Principal's observation process (based on Danielson's Framework for Teaching) was a large contributor to the overall assessment of classroom practices. In addition, teaching staff met one-on-one with the principal to reflect on strengths and areas of growth. In addition to the increased attention to further align teaching and learning to implement rigorous tasks and choice boards, attention has also been given to documenting and recording progress, and grade/content specific pacing calendars and regular Data Review meetings with the principal. As the standards require that students read and comprehend complex text, the percentage of students achieving proficiency on the 2018 NYS ELA was 82.5%. The percentage of students achieving proficiency as measured on the April 2017 NYS ELA was 73% . Overall, our school has noted yearly progress in the NYS ELA exam. Additionally, over the last few years we have been able to increase the achievement data for our students with IEP's from 47% scoring a level 1 in ELA in 2015 to 26% scoring a level 1 in 2017 and 23% scoring a level 1 in 2018. In mathematics our data is as promising, 30% of students with IEP's scored a level 1 in 2015 to 21% of students with IEP's scoring a level 1 in 2017 and 15% scoring at level 1 in 2018. This achievement is attributed to:  Strategic use of instruction time. The PS 94Q staff is examining how to maximize all instructional time by being aware of the length of mini-lessons, the use of differentiated learning, the use of small group instruction, and how to maximize students' "time on task".  Continue to create instructional and curricular cohesion. PS 94Q has been working on developing comprehensive curriculum maps that capture the essence of each content area and connect everything to our overarching focus on improving students' reading performance.  Participate in learning opportunities offered by the Queens North Field Support Center and Teachers College. The Queens North Field Support Center has been a crucial resource for our staff. Over the last two years our staff from Principal to Parent Coordinator to teachers and paraprofessionals have attended numerous Professional Learning Opportunities (PLC"s). The top 5 categories for PLC's attended by our staff is the following:, 21% attended Pedagogical Practices, 16% attended Math, 21% attended ELA related workshops, 12% attended Science workshops, 3  7% attended English language learners workshops. Approximately 80% of our staff has attended learning opportunities offered by the QNFSC. Additionally, each grade leader has attended workshops at Teacher's College. This school year we have two teachers serving as Math liaisons for the district and five teachers getting trained in Tier 3 reading interventions. In order to ensure steady improvement in the upcoming 2018/19 school year, it is imperative that students continue to move up in their independent reading levels in particular in the lower grades. Making a minimum of one year’s growth will bring students closer to reading on grade appropriate Lexile levels that are required by the Next Generation Learning Standards. Additionally, we will continue to work towards closing the achievement gap for our students with IEPs as well as our ENL students through differentiated lessons that meet the needs of individual students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of students will make at least one year of progress on the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) benchmarks for progress on Reading levels. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Independent Reading takes place every day in Grades K-5 both in school and at home (15-40 min /day based on grade level). Students will choose books based on their reading level and interest. Teacher will model appropriate Independent Reading behaviors and strategies during Guided Reading lessons. We will improve literacy instruction with a focus on Student Engagement in each and every reading and writing workshop, resulting in improved student outcomes. Reading on-level by June in:  Kindergarten– Level D  1 st Grade – Level J  2 nd Grade - Level M  3 rd Grade - Level P  4 th Grade - Level S  5 th Grade - Level V The teachers along with the members of the SLT committee will conduct periodic analysis of TCRWP running record assessment data on AssessmentPro to look for growth in students’ independent reading levels. The in-house model teacher will assist all staff in collecting and analyzing appropriate data. Individual classroom teachers and PLCs (grade level and vertical teams) will use analysis of running record assessments, student observations and conference notes of small group and individual students will be monitored to determine progress and next steps in reading skills and strategies to meet a June 2019 goal of 90% of students on or above grade level. Guided Reading groups (3x/week) in grades K-5 support movement into higher reading levels by meeting students’ individual phonemic, fluency, and comprehension needs. The purpose of each small group lesson will be made clear to the students through teacher modeling and use of precise academic language. These strategies will support our ENL students and students with disabilities. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom Teachers, Administration, PLCs, Parents K-5 Sept. 2018 Nov. 2018 Jan. 2019 March 2019 June 2019 Classroom Teachers, PLCs, Data Specialist, Administration K-5 Sept. 2018 Nov. 2018 Jan. 2019 March 2019 -June 2019 5 Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Learning Leaders, Nov. 2018 K-5 Sept. 2018 Jan. 2010 Paraprofessionals, March 2019 Administration June 2019 Read Alouds, shared reading, and close reading of complex texts through higher order DOK questioning will be based on teacher understanding of students’ prior knowledge and competence in reading skills and strategies in order to provide scaffolding and access for all students, including ELLs and SWDs. All students will be encouraged to think on their own and participate in whole-class and small group discussions. The Great Leaps Reading Fluency program will be used for targeted students in grades K-3. Fundations will be used as a whole class instructional program in Grades K and 1, ENL's and SWD's to teach Next Generation Learning Standards Foundational Skills. Curriculum mapping/pacing calendar work in Reading, Writing, Math, Science, and Social Studies. Targeted differentiated professional learning for teachers using the six (6) models of co-teaching to support access to the curriculum for students with special needs. Parent coordinator and teachers will provide interactive workshops to families so they can experience reading and writing workshop, so they understand how to assist children at home. Parents will be invited at monthly to attend various workshops and presentations during Family Engagement time on Tuesday's. Additionally, we will host night events such as, Family Literacy Night and more. Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) in reading ICT 12:1 Parents and Students Sept. 2018 Nov. 2018 Jan. 2019 March 2019 June 2019 Teachers, parent Coordinator, Administration Tier III students Sept. 2018 Nov. 2018 1 Special Education Teacher Jan. 2019 1 ESL Teacher 6 The school will be piloting a new reading program, Data Based Instruction (DBI). This will be administered to small groups of our Tier III students. This program will help the Hispanic and White subgroups who did not make AYP in both ELA and Math according NYSED Report Card 2016-20`17. Tier III students Classroom Teachers, Administration, PLC's, Paraprofessionals March 2019 June 2019 Sept. 2018 Nov. 2018 Jan. 2019 March 2019 June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our teachers will deliver grade specific workshops to parents regarding rigorous instruction by utilizing materials from Engage NY and Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project. Teachers will share strategies for reading, writing and math word problems. These workshops will take place on Tuesday's, PC Cafe or evenings from October 2018 to April 2019. Classroom teachers, ENL teacher, principal and parent coordinator will deliver these workshops. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administration, Teachers, Parent-Coordinator, Parents, Paraprofessionals, Data Specialist, grade level PLCs, Vertical Team, Parent Association. Instructional Resources: Leveled books for classroom libraries and guided reading book sets, Great Leaps Teacher and Student editions, Fundations kits and consumables for K, Leveled Literacy Intervention Kits, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project materials, Next Generation Learning ELA Standards, Danielson Framework for Teaching. Schedule Adjustments: Common Planning time, target time-frames, teacher lesson plans, Professional Learning Time (Diverse Learning Sessions). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7  By February 2019, 75% of students will be reading on or above grade level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TC Pro analysis, running records and conference notes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 80% of teachers and 86% of parents responded overwhelmingly positive to the supportive environment section. All responders agree that students are safe at PS 94, all students are being helped by various adults to develop their social emotional skills and the entire school community has high expectations for themselves. One area that scored below well below 90% is the ability of students to behave well in the classroom even when the teacher is not watching. The rating for this question was 79%. We will continue to require students to take a larger role in the classroom learning process including fostering respectful interactions with and among students. We will build on our current structure of self-assessments and student-to-student discussions to include respectful oral and written peer-assessments, which will include high performing students working with students who need extra support, such as our ELL and SWD students. This will build a community of trust and collaboration among students. We will continue the Stanford Harmony curriculum to all of our students from K to grade 5 to ensure life long skills are modeled and implemented. Additionally, we will engage our community in the RULER principles, the Mood Meter and Castel principles. Our guidance counselor will continue with grade 5 Peer Mediators and classroom lessons in grades K-5. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to improve school climate and culture students will participate in lesson and workshops aligned to themes that highlight acceptance of all others so that by June, 2019 there will be a 10% reduction in recess incidents as measured by reports generated by the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students will be taught how to engage in peer assessment by providing positive comments and next steps to their peers in a polite way using a rubric/checklist. Students will experience the Sanford Harmony exercises, Mood Meter and RULER, conducted by the teachers and the guidance counselor. All Students Gr. K-5 Sept. 2018-June 2019 All Teachers, Administration All Students Gr. K-5 Sept. 2018- All teachers, Administration June 2019 Staff members will incorporate lessons from the Diversity for All curriculum, Respect for All, Anti Bullying curriculum and Emotional Intelligence strategies during the school year. School leader will monitor the effectiveness of this initiate through the use of school walk-throughs with the lens of Danielson Framework components 2a and 2d and Quality Review indicator 1.4. Teachers, parent coordinator and guidance counselor will provide information to parents regarding the strategies of the program through workshops, phone calls, conferences, newsletters etc. All students Gr. K-5 All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 All Teachers, Administration All Teachers, Sept. 2018-June 2019 Gr. K-5 Administration Parents, Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The families of PS 94 will participate in workshops delivered by in house staff and outside organizations to ensure all stakeholders are aware of the strategies being taught to the students and how families can support the work at home. This work will take place from September 2018 to June 2019. We will continue our partnership with Thrive NYC. The parent coordinator, the Special Ed. liaison and the guidance counselor will be the key staff members to take this on. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0  Human Resources: Administration, All Teachers, Parent-Coordinator, Parents, Paraprofessionals. Resources: Sanford Harmony, Respect for Diversity curriculum, Respect for All curriculum, DOE resources Schedule Adjustments: Common Planning time, target time-frames, teacher lesson plans, Professional Learning Time (Diverse Learning Sessions). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a minimum 5% reduction in the number of occurrences during recess as measured by OORS reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to inform instruction and modify units of study to assist students in meeting learning goals for all students, including ELLs and SWDs, it is necessary for teachers and PLCs to have the opportunity to work together and collaborate on designing coherent learning tasks by grade level. This focus of our professional development work is a direct result of a Teacher Needs Assessment Survey and reflective practices from the last two years. According to the Framework for Great Schools Report 2017/18, in the Framework Element of Collaborative Teaching, the teachers responded positive in favor of opportunities to collaborate with each other. We will continue to work on the areas of our teachers working with teachers from other schools, which received a score of 68% positive responses. As per NYC School Quality Guide, in the area of Collaborative Teachers, 100% of the responders strongly agree with "..teachers design instructional programs together". Additionally, 95% of teachers responded positive to "school leader, teachers, and staff collaborate to make the school run effectively." As a result of a deep analysis of teacher survey and staff conversations, we plan to demonstrate an increase of at least 10% school inter collaborations visits. Our teachers will have an opportunity to visit other schools during the school year. The teachers have expressed interest in visiting other schools to enhance their practice and pedagogy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will design lessons that provide students with meaningful , high- quality computer science learning experiences so that by June , 2019 there will be 50% increase in average student proficiency in 4th grade Science. . 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers, will have the opportunity to work with a DOE CS4All coach in order to make instructional decisions, adjust teacher practice, set goals for student learning, develop curriculum scaffolds that will ensure instruction is more appropriate for the needs of all students including ELLs and SWDs, and assess progress toward June goals. The CS4All Teacher Team will attend various professional learning workshops throughout the year in order to support the teaching staff in meeting CS4All goals. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, All Teachers All teachers Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, All teachers CS4All Teacher Team members will turnkey professional learning workshop knowledge during designated PD times as well as individually as needed in classrooms. All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Engagement Sessions will be conducted to offer training to parents on how to work with their children at home using the strategies that have been successful with targeted groups of students in the classroom to improve achievement levels K-5 Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration, CS4All Teacher Team Members, All Teachers Classroom Teachers, Administration, Data Specialist, PLCs, ENL Teacher, Special Education Liaison 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The staff and parent coordinator will engage parents in workshops to help parents to understand what their children are learning in Computer Science. In December of 2018 the whole school will participate in a week-long computer science event. Parents will be able to participate in this event. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  Human Resources: Administration, Teachers, Special Education Liaison, ENL Teacher, Parent-Coordinator, Parents, Paraprofessionals, Data Specialist, grade level PLCs, Vertical Team, Parent Association, and Learning Leaders. Instructional Resources: Professional articles, research on instructional strategies, excerpts from various books, samples of inquiry cycle protocols, Schedule Adjustments: Common Planning time, target time-frames, teacher lesson plans, Professional Learning Time (Diverse Learning Sessions). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, teachers will include four computer science lessons per month in their lesson plans. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School wide PD Schedule, programming and QNFSC data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Professional Learning Plan, agendas, minutes, teacher feedback, teachers' professional goals and inter-visitations, for 2017-18 school year, approximately 85% of the teachers have had the opportunity to engage in a leadership role by presenting during a PL session or by hosting other staff members visiting their classroom to observe lesson structure, management strategies etc. According to the 2016 Framework for Great Schools Report, 84% of those teachers completing the survey responded positively to the Teacher Influence questions. The goal is to have professional learning opportunities for teachers by teachers. Teachers learn best when they have time to explore, understand and discuss new content. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In order to build capacity and improve pedagogy across the school, a minimum of one (1) teacher per grade will be identified for development so that by June 2019, at least 50% of professional learning cycles will be planned and conducted by teacher leaders as measured by a 7% increase in response to the prompt, "the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development," on the New York City School Survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Afford all teachers opportunities to facilitate grade level PLCs, vertical team meetings, district PLC's, Monday/Tuesday Professional Development Sessions, and Parent workshops. . Parents will be surveyed regarding their interest in workshop topics. A calendar will be generated and distributed in September 2018. Lead teachers will attend off-site professional learning sessions facilitated by central, FSC, district and Teachers College in content areas and share information on best practices, effective teaching strategies, and use and development of innovative instructional materials with their colleagues. All teachers will explore strategies to implement with ENL's and SWD's in their unit plans. Teachers will be given the opportunity to visit their colleagues in the school, as well as, visit other schools in the district to observe the use of these best practices, effective strategies, and innovative instructional materials with students. The principal leads by example by seeking outside sources and mentors to continue her own professional learning, such as, Leadership Academy, ELI, FSC, Emotional Intelligence sessions, etc.. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers, Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Lead Teachers, Administration All Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administration Administration Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to host monthly Tea with the Principal sessions, attend PTSA meetings, and workshops. The principal and parent coordinator will engage with families from September 2018-June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  Human Resources: Administration, Teachers, Parents, Parent Association, and Learning Leaders. Instructional Resources: ReadyGEN program, Teacher's College Writing Project, Go Math program, Exemplars, Great Leaps, Fundations, NYC Science and Social Studies Scope and Sequence documents, and the Danielson Framework for Teaching Schedule Adjustments: Common Planning time, target time-frames, teacher lesson plans, Professional Learning Time (Diverse Learning Sessions). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In order to maximize staff talents and strengths, and develop effective teacher leaders who can support the professional learning of individual teachers and teacher teams, the principal will create a school-wide culture of shared and distributed leadership across all stakeholders so that by February 2019, at least 45% of teachers will have had the opportunity to engage in a leadership role as evidenced by PL Plan, agendas, minutes, and scheduled inter visitations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Formal and informal observations, Danielson Framework for Teaching data, component 4e, in particular. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to The Framework For Great Schools, 90% of the parents responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or a school event. By June, 2019 we will see 5% increase in parent attendance at these events. We have hosted a variety of Parent / Community functions during the 2017-18 SY. Our school community has experienced workshops regarding content and curriculum. Based on parent interactions, our parents have been satisfied by the variety of activities. As we move into a new school year, it is our priority to bring more social, emotional and health workshops as well as presenting engaging speakers to our parent body. We will survey the PTSA to ensure we are aligned with their interests and wishes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. According to The Framework For Great Schools, 90% of the parents responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or a school event. Therefore, by June 2019, we will see a 5% increase in parent attendance at these events. In addition, by June, 2019, effective digital systems will be in place to improve communication between home and school, including communication with non-English speaking parents, leading to increased parental involvement in school functions and PTSA activities by a 5% increase in parent attendance at PTSA meetings and school functions as evidenced by parent records of attendance. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In conjunction with PTSA, school will implement a volunteer program to increase parental involvement by training parent volunteers to assist teachers in better meeting the varied needs of students. Parents will be trained on how to use the school website, Shutterfly, Twitter, Remind app, and other various digital tools in order to enhance learning. Translators will be trained in how to provide information on these websites in appropriate languages for our non-English speaking parents. Teachers will be proactive about communication with parents to support learning and strengthen the home-schools connection , using the parent engagement time on Tuesdays for activities such as meeting with parents, phone calls to parents, writing newsletters or updating school website. Parent teacher conferences will be held 4 times a year. The Parent Coordinator, school staff, SLT, and PTSA will work collaboratively to plan Parent workshops and Family Curriculum and Entertainment Nights throughout the year to increase parent involvement and engagement on a variety of topics including: ELL workshops, IEP workshops, ELA and Math Shifts, Getting ready for MS, OT workshops, Science workshops, etc. A translator will be available at these events upon parents request for non-English languages in our school community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents, Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 PTSA, Parent Coordinator, administration Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration Parents Sept. 2018- Administration, teachers June 2019 Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, teachers, Parent Coordinator, SLT, PTSA If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sanford Harmony, The Chinese American Planning Council, Asian-American Coalition for Education, Thrive NYC Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  Human Resources: Administration, Teachers, Parents, Parent Association, and Learning Leaders. Instructional / Communication Resources: Teacher's College Writing, ReadyGEN program, Go Math program, Great Leaps, Fundations, NYC Science and Social Studies Scope and Sequence documents, School Messenger, and School website, Thrive NYC resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, effective systems will be in place to improve communication between home and school, including non-English speaking families, leading to increased parental involvement in school functions and PTSA activities, as evidenced by PTSA and school function attendance sheets showing that at least 75% of students will have had at least one parent attend at least 1 PTSA or school function. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets will be used to assess and monitor progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher input; PPT meetings; Inquiry Teams Lowest 1/3 by class/school Teacher input; PPT meetings; Inquiry Teams Lowest 1/3 by class/school Teacher input; PPT meetings; Inquiry Teams Lowest 1/3 by class/school Teacher input; PPT meetings; Inquiry Teams Lowest 1/3 by class/school Teacher input; PPT meetings; Parent requests Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Great Leaps; Fundations; Guided Reading; SDI; Dibles;Engage NY, Remediation; Engage NY Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group; one-to -one During school Small group; one-to -one During school Amplify;Teacher created materials; Small group; one-to -one During school Trade books; teacher created materials Small group; one-to -one During school Super You Small group; one-to -one Peer Mediators During school Beautiful Me Sanford Harmony 1  MoodMeter 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 8 students Doubled Up 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3 School supplies  Book bag   Grade level reading books  Counseling services  Parent outreach by the guidance counselor Intervention services provided by teachers  3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $989 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 6  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 94, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 094 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 9  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 094 School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 094 ,n compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 0  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 1  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 3  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Language instruction under Title III will take place after school above and beyond the mandated core. The program will focus on improving the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. P.S. 094Q has experienced an influx of newcomers on the entering and emerging level that need intense small group interaction. Students who are new admits need several learning modalities as entry points into learning English. One goal is to provide the ELLs with language functions to help them move forward in their knowledge and use of English. A second goal is to provide them with exposure to content specific vocabulary, idioms and inferential reasoning. The data on the 2018 NYSESLAT supports these needs as there are six students in grades three and five who scored at Entering and Emerging. Two additional Entering students are anticipated on the first day of school. Other students have been improving in listening and speaking and need an extra boost to help them make gains in reading and writing. It is intended that the students participating in the Title III Program will produce projects that focus on Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM). The students will use organizers, speaking starters, sentence starters, paragraph frames, summarizing and paraphrasing to clarify the meaning of ideas and text evidence. The data on the 2018 NYSESLAT supports these needs as there are twelve students in grades two through five who scored at Expanding and there greatest needs are in reading and writing. Two groups of twelve students will include differentiated instruction and will impact significantly on student gain. At this time, the target group will include 2nd through 5th grade. The program will utilize a variety of strategies including total physical response and introduction of visual realia for intitally learning a concept. In addition, a balance of word work, read-alouds, guided reading, fluency practice, independent reading, journal responses to hands-on activities and reading selections, writing off prompts, including a topic sentence, development of details and a concluding sentence. Hand2Mind STEM kits will provide hands-on problem solving projects that will prompt discussion and problem solving strategies. This supports the NYC initiative focusing on STEAM development. Students will be exposed to Tier 2 (academic vocabulary) and Tier 3 (content area vocabulary) words that will impact their vocabulary development and college readiness. Materials used are supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. It is intended that these programs will provide students with strategies to read and unpack content they will encounter in any reading passage whether it be during classroom studies, on state tests or in real life. Students will be given direct instruction 80% of the time with two certified NYS teachers--one certified in Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) and one certified in General Education. The TESOL teacher will work in collaboration with the General Education teacher in planning and delivering instruction. Two contiguous grades (2nd / 3rd grade and 4th / 5th grade) will be grouped together. The remaining 20% will be used for online instruction using the research-based I-Ready program, which addresses phonological awareness, phonics, sight word knowledge, vocabulary development and comprehension of fiction and non-fiction genres. A second program, Learning A-Z with RazKids will provide online leveled reading in both fiction and non-fiction genres. This program includes an assessment feature which provides multiple choice questions and allows the students to look back at the passage to 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information locate details before answering each question. These programs will be used as part of flexible grouping. Students will also have access to them at home as additional home language support. Students will be assessed through teacher, peer and self checklists, group sharing, portfolios, journal keeping, observations,conferencing and diagnostic tests. Records will be maintained by holding the students' work in folders designated for the program. English will be the language of instruction. The program will meet starting mid-October and continue through the end of March. Attendance will be taken at each session. The group will meet from 2:45-4:00 PM on Wednesdays and Thursdays for 38 sessions. Parents will be notified about the program and will be notified in parents' preferred languages. An administrator will be present in the building during these sessions. No other program will be running after school necessitating the a budget for supervisor per session. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional development will entail the study of next generation standards to insure students are meeting standards crosswalks. Along with next generation standards study, work produced by the students will be part of inquiry work to study and analyze students' strengths and next steps to help them advance. The PD providers will be the ENL teachers who are certified in TESOL. These professional developments will take place October 3, 10, November 7, 14, December 5, 12, January 2, and 9. The professional development cost is described in the budget. There will be eight sessions which will be one hour in length each. Records will be maintained with attendance sheets and agendas. Topics to be covered will include Examination of the ELA 2nd Grade Crosswalk, Examination of the ELA 3rd Grade Crosswalk, Examination of the 4th Grade Crosswalk, and Examination of the 5th Grade Crosswalk. The rationale behind this ongoing professional development will be to create a positive impact on the progress of the ELLS by pinpointing students' needs as the program progresses and addressing those needs in subsequent lessons. The ENL teachers will also attend PD during the school year 2018-2019. Topics and dates have not yet been made available by the DOE. PD will impact students reading, writing, listening and speaking strategies as aligned with the NYSESLAT. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Title III services will be rendered to parents/guardians. Two certified teachers along with the parent coordinator will conduct parent and community participation activities so that parents can support their children's growth in their knowledge of English. Needs analysis indicates that parents are unfamiliar with ways to support their children in reading and writing. The two Title III teachers will plan and facilitate the workshops. Four workshops are planned for October 19 from 2:45-3:45 PM, November 13 and December 4 and April 5 during Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays from 2:40-3:20 PM. Topics will include "Introduction to the Title III STEM ELL Program and Expectations," "Understanding the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT," "Homework Strategies and Reading with Your Children," and "Reading and Writing Olympics--Reading with your Children During the Summer Months." Parents will also be invited periodically during instructional times to view students products. Parents will be notified through a notice that will be backpacked home with their child. Notification of the events will be sent home in the parents' preferred language. Parents of Title III students as well as parents of ELLs will be invited so that all have the opportunity to attend the events. Translation services will be made available at all events with the assistance of teachers who speak the parents' native language. Records will be maintained and held in a folder including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents' preferred languages. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 6914.10 1808.33 970.40 121.30 Purchased services  High quality staff 0.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 38 sess X 1.5hrs/sess X2X$60.65/hr 38 sess X .75 hr/sess X 1 X $63.45/hr 8 sess X 1 hr/sess X 2 X$60.65/hr 1 sess X 1 hr/sess X 2 X $60.65/hr N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 1638.87 Stem Journals, Stem Reproducible Activity Kits, Stem library 688.00 225.00 32 licenses for I-Ready 8 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. A-Z Learning, Raz-Plus with ELL support N/A N/A N/A Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A $ 12,366 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name David D. Porter Borough Queens School Number 094 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Laura Avakians Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Susan Ciano Mazzo Teacher/Subject Area Jacklyn Yang Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Lauren Henderson Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal n/a Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Janel Doddo/Patricia Kambourak Parent Coordinator Georgia Katehis Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1.4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 327 0 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.87%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 094 uses TCRWP to assess early literacy skills of our ELLs. This assessment is useful in identifying recognition of letters, letter sounds, sight words, decoding and rhyming ability, retelling ability and comprehension knowledge. This information helps ours school's instructional plan in that each teacher working with our ELLs will know how to differentiate so that each student can make progress. At present there are twenty-seven newcomer ELLs who have 3 or less years of service, as well as six kindergartners. All have few sight words, limited rhyming and decoding ability, and limited comprehension knowledge/retelling ability. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All general education teachers and the ENL teacher meets once a week to discuss structures in place in order to ensure academic, social and emotional success for the ENL students. All students participate in guided reading groups with their regular teacher and with ENL teacher. Teachers utilize data from TCRWP assessments (running records, concepts of print, 1  letter identification assessment, sight word lists) to drive instruction. For ELLs, differentiated instruction will be used to foster their learning through the use of visuals and small group lessons. In addition, ENL students in grades 1-5 have access to the computer based support program, "I-Ready." Finally, Fundations is used by the Kindergarten, first and ENL teachers. These supports address phonological awareness, phonics, vocabulary development, and comprehension. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our programs for ELLs is evaluated by looking at each individual child's progress over the course of the year. This includes looking at ELL Periodic Assessment, Fall and Spring Benchmark Tests, reading level progression, writing samples over time, frequency in class participation during class discussions and finally scores achieved on the NYSESLAT and standardized tests in ELA, Math and Science. ELL Periodic Assessment indicates whether students can respond to listening, reading and writing tasks similar to those that would be found on the NYSESLAT. Fall and Spring Benchmark tests indicate whether students can respond to prompts about theme, main idea, character, and author's craft. Reading level progression indicates whether students are decoding and understanding new vocabulary, reading with fluency, retelling important parts using connecting words, and whether they can answer literal and inferential questions about the text. Writing samples indicate whether students can write on a topic introducing the subject, using details within a paragraph, using connecting words between paragraphs, and finish with a conclusion. Class participation reveals whether students feel comfortable asking questions and adding to a conversation. The results of all the classroom work reflects on the state tests and scores achieved on the NYSESLAT and standardized tests in ELA, Math and Science. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students' results are reviewed through item analysis. Teachers group students according to their needs and provide instruction to remedy weak areas. Scaffolded support includes organizers, sentence and paragraph frames, explicit vocabulary instruction, computer based I-Ready instruction, anchor charts, word banks, visual supports, and bilingual dictionaries. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Universal screening is used to establish a baseline of student performance and identify students who are not making academic progress at expected rates. Screening assessments give clear indications of risk in specific domains through set benchmarks or criteria, or by detailing how a child performs relative to peers of the same age or grade level. These assessments often point out risks that may not be apparent from classroom interactions alone, and they are especially useful for understanding performance across groups of students. Strengthening classroom instruction (i.e., the instructional core), is a key step to supporting ELLs at-risk for or experiencing difficulties, as well as a critical step in fully implementing the RtI model. ELLs may show low academic achievement because the instructional core has not met their needs as learners. Since the RtI model works best, and serves the greatest number of students, when the instructional core is tailored to the needs of the classroom population, it holds particular promise in settings with high numbers of ELLs. The Center for Research on Education, Diversity and Excellence (CREDE) provides five interrelated instructional principles for teachers of linguistically diverse populations. By following these principles and teaching rigorous academic content, educators can create high-quality instructional environments that foster academic success. The teaching staff uses "Go Math" and "ReadyGen." Embedded within the programs are checkpoints that indicate whether a student is understanding the concepts being taught. If the student is having difficulty responding during checkpoints, the student is pulled into a tier III or tier II group for remediation. Once they show success in the remediation activity, they join back into the mainstream of the instructional program. Collaboration in the service of jointly constructing knowledge provides students with opportunities to positively engage with one another and with their teacher around rigorous academic content. Such interactions boost academic development and academic motivation. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Patterns across proficiency levels and NYSESLAT modalitis reveal that students advanced along the proficiency levels. In kindergarten, students who took the NYSITELL and entered at the "Entering" Level progressed to Emerging or Transitioning on the NYSESLAT. Students who entered as Transitioning advanced to Expanding or Commanding. Students in first and second 2  grade who took the NYSESLAT advanced from Transitioning or Expanding to Commanding. Other students maintained their performance as Expanding students. In third and fourth grade, students who were Expanding progressed to Commanding. Some students who are newcomers progressed from Entering to Emerging or Transitioning. According to the EDAT, patterns on the NYSESLAT show that out of 28 test takers, 12 (42.9%) scored Commanding. In the School Summary Report, it showed that 10 students advanced 1 proficiency level, 4 students advanced two proficiency levels, and one student advanced three proficiency levels. The School Summary Report also shows that the kindergartners were very strong in the reading and writing modalities. The first through fifth grade were strong in the speaking modality. In grades 1, 3 and 4 the writing modality is an area of need. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS are shared with general education teachers to help them be aware of the at risk levels, attendance, long term ELLs, Sife status, State Exam Results as well as the progression on the NYSESLAT. Teachers meet horizantally by grade level and vertically across grade levels to plan how to close the gap between where the students are performing and where they need to get to. Professional development aids general teachers to give the teachers tools and strategies, and finally the teachers reflect whether the strategies have worked. In addition, the Title III afterschool program incorporates strategies to help the students by providing additional support to help students close the gap between where they are performing and where they need to be. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction will be delivered using integrated and standalone ENL as per CR Part 154.2. Kindergarten, second, third, fourth and fifth grade ELLs and Former ELL students will be served in either a heterogeneous and/or a homogeneous pull-out organizational model by a dually certified teacher. No more than two contiguous grade levels will be scheduled together. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Each ELL's program is arranged as follows. Students at the Entering Level are receiving 180 minutes of standalone ENL, and 180 minutes of integrated ENL including differentiated texts, online articles and videos, and trade books. Students at the Emerging Level are receiving 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of either standalone or integrated ENL including differentiated texts and trade books to support the theme being studied in ReadyGen. Students at the Transitioning Level are receiving 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 minutes of either standalone or integrated ENL including differentiated texts, online articles and videos, and trade books to support the theme being studied in ReadyGen. Students at the Expanding Level are receiving 180 minutes of integrated ENL including differentiated texts, online articles and videos, and trade books to support the theme being studied in ReadyGen. Former ELLs at the Commanding Level are receiving 90 minutes of integrated ENL in ELA or content area including differentiated texts, 3  online articles and videos, and trade books to support the theme being studied in ReadyGen. Home Language supports are available to students in the form of home language dictionaries and glossaries and Google translate. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Science and social studies content areas are delivered by a combination using the ENL teacher, the science teacher and the grade level teacher using English as a language of instruction. In order to make content comprehensible, all teachers use scaffolding techniques such as organizers, visuals, hands-on activities, smartboard technology and any other realia that will help to create comprehensible input. In addition, differentiated instruction is a prime strategy used by all teachers. For instance, intervention support is embedded in the Go Math instructional program. All these approaches meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Native Language supports are available to students in the form of home language dictionaries and glossaries and Google translate. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that students whose home language is Spanish receive the Spanish LAB. We ensure that all students in grades 3 through 5 receive the math and science state tests in their home language (Korean, Spanish, Chinese, and Russian). Students with other native languages receive translators for the math and science state tests. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students and ELLs in school less that three years (newcomers) are initially given survival language including learning to ask questions that will help them learn new vocabulary every day. Instruction is differentiated for Newcomer ELLs. For instance, they learn to use "Wh" words which help project them from basic vocabulary into academic vocabulary enabling them to make connections into the story elements of literacy. Newcomers have immediate access to bilingual dictionaries and keep an alphabetical notebook of new words learned. Newcomers are given small group attention. In student groupings, newcomers are given tasks that is within their range of ability, such as pointing to pictures while another student gives oral explanations. In addition, using total physical response (TPR) gives students basic vocabulary but can also be a jumping off point for lessons on cause and effect as well as compare and contrast, thus kick starting higher level thinking needed on ELA testing. ELLs receiving service 4-6 years are often very close to Commanding Level and generally need the added support in writing. Instructional support includes teaching them to use semantic webs to explore vocabulary. Many varieties of organizers help them to organize their thoughts so that they can transfer their ideas into a well-sequenced paragraph and/or essay. Other supports include playing word games to help them internalize correct grammatical phrasing such as subject-verb agreement and use of verb tenses Long Term ELLs and Former ELLs profit from above mentioned webs and organizers as they explore deeper academic vocabulary for the content areas of ELA, Science and Social Studies. All ELLs and FELLs receive test accommodations which allow them to 1 1/2 time. They also have access to bilingual glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Both the SETTS, ICT Special Ed and ENL teachers provide support with compehension. Read-alouds across the genres along with modeled think-alouds and questioning that builds up higher order thinking are instructional strategies used so that students can gain access to grade level materials that might have otherwise not been available to them. Additional online programs include myON and Bookflix and BrainPop in which students read and listen to books on their designated level. Language arts activities are available on starfall.com and abcya.com. The SETTS teacher selects activities for subgroups that meet the needs of SWDs. The ENL teacher refers to the student's IEP to insure that the student's goals are being met. Using these strategies to build decoding skills, recalling information and inferential thinking help ELL-SWDs advance in their knowledge of English. 4  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs that have been identified benefit from strategies mentioned above. In addition, to the multi-disciplinary approach to learning that is offered in the general education setting, ICT, and during SETSS services, our school has created a program allowing for flexible scheduling. In doing so, students are able to work alongside their peers in the general education setting and receive targeted instruction, based on student needs, during ICT small group instruction, through the self-contained classroom, SETSS small group instruction, and/or during their ELL mandated periods. The Special Education teachers and ENL teacher collaborate to create a schedule that affords ELL-SWDs maximum support within the least restrictive environment as deemed necessary on their Individualized Education Plan. The IEP and goals are reviewed in order to assure instructional flexibility to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Academic Intervention Services are offered for SIFE and newcomers as part of a Tier III group by which the classroom teacher pulls a group of students after presenting an ELA, math, social studies or science core content area mini-lesson. The teacher implements scaffolded strategies and activities in order to increase the comprehensible input that aligns with the goal of the lesson. Those students may continue to be included with developing and long term ELLs who are offered intervention services as part of a Tier II group. The classroom teacher implements additional strategies and activities that meet the needs of those students. The ESL teacher supports the classroom teacher by offering similar and/or additional strategies so as to enable the students to get a better command of the language. For instance, the students may be reading about a topic in ReadyGen. Targeted interventions would include looking at pictures to get the meaning, using sentence frames and organization charts to guide conversations and notetaking. Sequencing cards help students to understand the order of the story. Providing students with sentence starters to enable them to ask questions helps teachers know what they have questions about. In science and social studies, students can expand their understanding of scientific and social studies terminology by stating the relationships between pairs of related words. Students can give facts about what they learned by referring to photos in the text. Students can use text features to understand and expand their science vocabulary. Students can compare certain concepts by pointing to how pictures in a text are the same or different. In math, students need to understand the meaning of words in word problems. Students can work together to act out the problem or draw the scenario. A buddy in the group can help lend an understanding of word meaning that may be confusing to the ELL student. All intervention services are offered in English with home language supports such as home language dictionaries and glossaries and a more advanced student who speaks the beginner ELL's native language. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Improvements will include the placement of a smartboard in the ENL teacher's classroom, and the purchase of the research-based Fountas & Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention. The smartboard will provide a technology component that will add visual support. The Leveled Literacy Intervention kits will add structured guided reading support for each student on their reading level. The afterschool program will offer STEM instruction that will provide hands-on problems for students to solve. The students will be enriched with high level vocabulary and real world problems. They will be placed on teams and will be able to support each other as they continue to improve their knowledge of English. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. One such program is the Cozy Comfort Program, a recycling program, offered by the science teacher. This program includes all students in fifth grade. ELLs are especially valued for their artistic input. ELL students run for student government. They are nominated by their classmates. A former ELL is currently student council treasurer. Many of our ELLs also enroll in our afterschool program "InMotion" which offers them homework help and art and movement activities. Before school programs include ELLs in morning basketball and chorus. Notices are sent home at 5  the beginning of the school year and posted on the school website. Students may join the after school program at any time. This service enables ELL students to socialize with students whose native language is English and enables them to progress in their knowledge of English. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs include leveled reading materials, anchor charts, organizers, paragraph and sentence frames, bilingual glossaries, manipulatives, checklists, visuals, realia and maps, desktop focus questions, and rubrics. All materials may contain either content area vocabulary or a language objective. Technology materials include I-Ready and Raz Kids. ELLs are presented with materials based on their reading level so they can absorb a maximum amount of comprehensible input without reaching a frustration level. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our school offers ENL. Home language support is available 25% of the time through New York State Education Department Science and Social Studies bilingual Korean, Chinese and Spanish content area glossaries, bilingual Korean, Chinese and Spanish dictionaries and Google Translate. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures that all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. Students are placed in grades appropriate to their birth date. Students are also grouped with their age appropriate peers for all services provided for them. Both the SETTS, ICT Special Ed and ENL teachers provide support with compehension. Read-alouds across the genres along with modeled think-alouds and questioning that builds up higher order thinking are instructional strategies used so that students can gain access to grade level materials that might have otherwise not been available to them. Additional online programs include Bookflix and BrainPop in which students read and listen to books on their designated level. Language arts activities are available on starfall.com.. The SETTS teacher selects activities for subgroups that meet the needs of SWDs. The ENL teacher refers to the student's IEP to insure that the student's goals are being met. Using these strategies to build decoding skills, recalling information and inferential thinking help ELL-SWDs advance in their knowledge of English. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school include attendance at the summer school Title III program in the district. Activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year include a newcomer class time with the ESL teacher. The school counselor takes students at-risk to help students meet challenges that come up. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At the present time, there are no language electives offered to any students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a 6  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school, that is, all teachers of ELLs includes professional development on Mondays from 2:40 to 4:00 P.M. Workshops for staff in all content areas include but are not limited to Project Based Learning across all content areas, UDL for multiple entry points in all content areas, content area vocabulary and Smartboard Technology-interactive learning to increase student engagement. Paraprofessionals receive pd in Great Leaps-a response to intervention to close the achievement gap. Guidance counselors and psychologists receive pds in interacting with and supporting students in crisis. Occupational/Physical therapists receive pd on techniques in handwriting. Secretaries receive pd on ATS filling out Adult Preferred Language, Student Native language, knowledge about home language surveys. Parent coordinators receive pd regarding Language Access Coordinators responsibilities. Professional development will be offered to teachers of ELLs, including ENL teachers, in supporting ELLs as they engage in Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) through the Office of English Language Learners (OELL) and through the Borough Field Support Centers. All professional development is based on data on the ELL population in the school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school will provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 154.2 will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. This professional development will be offered the first Monday of each month, and during professional development days in November and June. Agendas and attendance sheets will be generated weekly and kept in a file for easy access. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to dicuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas through in person meetings, phone calls and letters to parents. Interpretation and translation is provided as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are encouraged to become members of the PTSA. Parents are also invited to be chaperones on class trips. Parents are invited to class celebrations and to the monthly Porter's Pal Assembly that highlights students in each class who have shown especially kind and caring qualities of leadership for that month. Parents are involved in school celebrations such as the yearly Reading and Writing Olympics Celebration, Harvest Festival and the International Food Festival. Bilingual parents attending the events serve as translators on an as need to basis. 7  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, LAURA AVAKIANS, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: David D. Porter School DBN: 26Q094 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Laura Avakians Title Principal Assistant Principal Georgia Katehis Parent Coordinator Susan Ciano Mazzo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Janel Doddo Jacklyn Yang Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Lauren Henderson Other SETTS Patricia Kambouraki Other Parent Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 9/18/17 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q094 School Name: David D. Porter Superintendent: Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Susan Mazzo Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Report of Preferred Languages (RAPL), Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), the parent guardian student ethnic form, the ethnic census report, the ethnicity and gender report and Student Emergency Contact cards(Blue cards) and Parent Surveys conducted by our school are the data and methodologies used to assess the schools written and oral interpretation needs to ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English--500 English 75% English--500 English 75% English Korean Chinese Spanish Korean--48 Chinese--70 Spanish--38 Korean 7% Chinese 9% Spanish 5% Korean--48 Chinese--70 Spanish--38 Korean 7% Chinese 9% Spanish 5% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The school calendar for 2018-19, dates for parent/teacher conferences and New York State testing dates are available on the DOE website in the parent's preferred language. After-school program information is distributed as parents ask for it. Newsletters are sent every month. The school calendar for 2018-19, dates for parent/teacher conferences and New York State testing dates are presently available on the DOE website in the parents' preferred language, thus ensuring timely The school typically disseminates newsletters, calendars monthly, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information at the beginning of the school year, New York State testing dates in January, a general overview of the student curriculum and letters from the school leadership monthly. 2  translation. After-school program information is presently available thus ensuring timely translation. Newsletters are translated monthly thus ensuring timely translation. When possible, bilingual staff including Ms. Yang, Mrs. Wu, Ms. Pappas, Ms. Glus and Ms. Villacreses will be used to translate those documents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school The school holds parent-teacher conferences. Informal interactions, such as attendance teacher or guidance counselor calls to parents will take place on an as need basis. Parent Workshops for the NYS tests plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parents will be informed of availability of translated documents at Back to School Night. The school avails itself to Spanish, Chinese and Korean speakers September 13, 2018, November 15, 2018, March 14, 2019, May 15, 2019. Translated dates for parent-teacher conferences are 3  available on the DOE website. through the guidance counselor, nurse and teachers at the school. These include Ms. Yang, Mrs. Wu, Ms. Pappas, Ms. Glus and Ms. Villacreses. The school also uses the Translation and Interpretation Unit Telephone Service and DOE approved translation agencies. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school's communication strategy to reach limited-English proficient families in the event of a school emergency will be to use native language speakers available in the school building as well as the Translation and Interpretation Unit Telephone Service. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members will be made aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 during professional learning on September 6, 2017 at the Chancellor's Conference for staff development. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 4   Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services as per Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 by posting a welcome poster, distributing the Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access, and by providing the Language ID Guide at the security desk and main office. In addition, the first PTSA meeting in September will inform parents of their right to receive information in their home language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will view the parent survey to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. The principal also hosts monthly meetings for parents to attend and express any concerns, including gathering feedback and best practices on the availability of translation services. The school will also consider scheduling a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices on communicating with families. 5 
