 28Q101 School Name: P.S. 101 SCHOOL IN THE GARDENS Principal: MONIQUE LOPEZ-PANIAGUA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 28Q101 Elementary 3428000010101 Pre - K-6 2 Russell Place, Forest Hills, NY 11375 718-268-7230 Phone Number: 718-575-3571 Fax: Monique Lopez-Paniagua Mlopez69@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Monique Lopez-Paniagua Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Matthew Schneider Thomas Miale Matthew Schneider None None None District Information Geographical District: 28Q Mabel Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Blvd., Queens, NY 11435 Superintendent’s Office Address: MSarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)557-2618 Phone Number: (718) 557-2623 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) South Queens Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director:   8201 RockawayBlvd, Ozone Park, NY 11354 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6745 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Monique Lopez-Paniagua Matthew Schneider Thomas Miale Saba Khan LiannArnold-Liebman Karen Imas Sari Sharaby-Swartz Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/Parent Member Member/ Parent Member Member/ Parent Member Member/ Parent Member   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Danielle Ryf Jessica Kaminsky Amanda Hoesel Member/ Teacher Member Member/Teacher Member Member/Teacher Member Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Mission Statement: The mission of P.S. 101Q, the School of the Gardens, is to provide rigorous, well-rounded educational program that will foster the development of literate, creative, culturally aware and technologically competent learners. We will create an environment that promotes excellence in achievement, in which students strive to meet or exceed the New York State Standards. We will encourage a love of learning through innovative and challenging programs. Parents and staff will work together to ensure that all children reach their potential in a safe   and nurturing environment. All members of our school community will celebrate individual differences and promote good citizenship. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 101Q, the School in the Gardens is an elementary school with approximately 670 students as of September 2018, from Pre-Kindergarten to grade 6. The school population comprises of 3.9% Black, 17.2% Hispanic, 26.5% Asian, 44.5% White and multi-racial 7.8%. The student body includes 5% English Language Learners and 9.5% students with special needs. P.S. 101Q provides a rigorous, well-rounded educational program that fosters the development of literate, creative, culturally aware and technologically competent learners. The school community creates an environment that promotes excellence in academic achievement, in which students strive to meet or exceed Common Core Learning Standards. This is evident in the fact that in 2017-2018, 78% percent of the students scored on or above grade level on the New York State English Language Arts state exam. 80% of the students scored on or above grade level on the New York State Math exam. In addition, the 2018 NYC School Survey showed a 4.9% out of 5% for Rigorous Instruction; 4.73% for Collaborative Teachers; 3.86% for Supportive Environment; 4.55% for Effective School Leadership; 4.55% for Strong Family Community Ties; 4.21% for Trust. P.S. 101Q excels in performance and progress in terms of academic achievement . The school has been rated “Well Developed” on the Quality Review for two consecutive reviews in 2013 and 2016. The school rating is above the city average for the NYC School Survey for four consecutive years. The focus priority strategy for the 2018-2019 school year will be to build teacher capacity to improve students critical thinking skills by using the HESS Matrix (rubic), LCI Critical Thinking Protocol and Danielson 3b Highly Effective Practices. The focus priority is for teachers to develop strategies collaboratively for fostering critical thinking (HESS Matrix Level 3). All stakeholders will be engaged through professional learning sessions for teachers and parents. Teachers are provided collaborative learning opportunities to develop strategies to foster critical thinking. Teachers are also given feedback in observations around critical thinking. It is the goal of the school to encourage a love of learning through innovative and challenging programs. The school’s curricula consists of Go Math , Teachers’ College Reading and Writing Workshops , Harcourt Science and the New York City Social Studies Scope and Sequence . Explorations in Art is the curriculum for our art program and Spotlight on Music is the curriculum for our music program. For the social emotional component of the curricula, the school implements RULER, by Yale University in conjunction with PBIS and Power Brain. In addition, the school continues to engage in community reads around the core values of the school. Our core values are Steadfastness, Thoughtfulness, Inclusiveness, Nurturing, Grateful, Empathetic, Respectful. The acronym STINGERS aligns with our school logo. We are the STINGERS and are busy bees ensuring that the sting we leave behind positively affects those around us. P.S. 101Q and P.A. of P.S. 101Q collaboratively work together to provide the students with the best educational experience possible. There is a strong collaborative relationship between the school and home as evidenced by the NYC School Survey and multiple school home initiatives. There is a strong partnership between school staff and parents, who work together to ensure that all children reach their academic potential in a safe and nurturing environment. There are several teacher/parent committees such as, Head Lice and Graduation Committees. The PA sponsors all residencies, subsidize special trips, special assemblies and our enrichment after school program. In addition, the PA hosts community events such as Monster Mash, the school Talent Show, Scholastic Book Fair, School Auction, and the school International Dinner. 0  P.S. 101Q fosters partnerships with community based organizations such as Teachers’ College Columbia University, Yale University, Power Brain, Swim for Life, Soccer Friends, Square Dancing, Thinking Caps, Skedula/ Pupil Path and several other residency programs in order to enrich the educational experience of our students. We also encourage student teachers to participate in our community through our partnerships with St. John’s, Queens College and York College. P.S. 101Q collaborates with the PA and community based organizations to continually provide a rigorous, well-rounded educational program that fosters the development of literate, creative, culturally aware learners. The Most Growth: The math performance for proficiency shows that the school's scores increased 8% in 2018. The ELA performance for proficiency shows a 7% increase. The school has made the most consistent growth in Rigorous instruction, and Strong Family Community Ties based on our NYC School Survey 2018. The Challenges: As a high performing school, it is a challenge to consistently show growth for all of our students. Our enrollment increased by over 100 students in the past three years. Last year, our teachers worked diligently to providing differentiated challenging instructional tasks for all students. Last year, our teachers also worked on critical thinking through questioning. Based on observations and vertical team meetings, administration and teachers agreed that critical/strategic thinking according to the HESS matrix and Danielson 3B for Highly Effective Practices needed to be developed more. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Students who scored the lowest third, or a level 1 or 2, had little growth in moving up in performance levels for mathematics. Those students have been identified and teachers will support these students through small group work around priority standards. Teachers will also meet with those parents in September and October to develop plans of support with the parents. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We made the most progress with rigorous instruction. Our internal data shows that more students are on and above grade level in ELA. Our Rigorous instruction goal will be revised to reflect more critical thinking work. In addition, the school will focus on moving performance levels for students in the bottom third. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q101 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 654 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 10 27 26 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 18.0% % Attendance Rate 14.7% % Reduced Lunch 5.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 17.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 44.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.68 0% 20% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 77.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 45 46 27 95.2% 3.2% 13.6% 3.1% 27.2% 8.1% 4 3% 7.3 80.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In Mathematics, 80% of our students scored proficient or above. There was an 8% increase of proficient students on the state math exam for 2017-2018 school year. In ELA, 78% of our students scored proficient or above. There was a 7% increase of proficient students on the state ELA exam for 2017-2018 school year. The school-wide trends; Students scoring on and above proficiency levels have increased. Teacher observations indicate that 81% of teachers received "Effective" ratings and 19% of teachers received "Highly Effective" ratings. Last year, the school instructional goal was collaborating to develop critical thinking questions for discussion. Although we noticed the quality of questioning was better across the vast majority of classrooms, most teachers were still rated "Effective" for Questioning and Discussions. In order to move toward more "Highly Effective" practices, the questioning should be high level and students should be taught how to question classmates in order to push the thinking to higher levels. Therefore, this year the instructional goal will be around strategic thinking questions according to the HESS Matrix and getting students to question one another at these levels. The priority need; To ensure that instructional practices for critical thinking are embedded in ELA. Therefore, we will increase the percentage of teachers engaging in "Highly Effective" practices according to Danielson 3B and the HESS Matrix for Strategic Thinking. We will increase the percentage of students questioning one another at high levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 3  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will collaborate on strategies for fostering student led discussions that promote higher order thinking skills needed for college, career and citizenship. There will be evidence of an increase in student ability to engage in higher order thinking skills through a 5% increase in Teachers College Writing rubric scores. (The higher scores on the writing rubric require higher order thinking skills). 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  There will be Vertical Team meetings around HOT Questions (Higher Order Thinking) questions. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students the team members choose for targeted instruction. This will be monitored in three cycles Classroom teachers, SETSS teacher, Special Education teachers, Administration. October 15, 2018- January 2019, January 2019- March 2019, March 2019 to June 2019. Administrators will collect periodic data analysis 4 times a year for writing to analyze, conduct cycles of observations and meet weekly in C6 with grade teams. Administrators This will be monitored in four cycles Classroom teachers, SETSS teacher, Special Education teachers and administration. October 15, 2018- November 2018; November 2018- January 2019; January, 2019 - March 10, 2019; March 5  Deepening the Knowledge of Content (Unit Plans) will be revised for strategies for student led discussions and essential questions for each unit in order to promote higher order thinking skills. Teachers and students Inter visitations around questioning to promote higher order thinking and discourse will be conducted. Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2019 - May 2019. This will be monitored in two cycles October 15, 2018- January 2019, January, 2019 - March 10, 2019. October 2018- January 2019 and January 2019 - March 2019. Teachers and administration. Teachers and administration. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will develop parent workshops and/or create documents to engage parents concerning questioning and higher order thinking skills; such as; Monthly Parent Guides. Teachers will also develop videos around questioning to promote higher order thinking for parents. All videos will be uploaded onto the school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers, Parent-Coordinator, Parents, Supervisors, Parents Association, Teachers College Staff Developers. Operational Resources: C6, Per Session, Purchase more books and teaching tools. Instructional Resources: Leveled Literacy Intervention Kits, GoMath Curriculum, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project materials and Harcourt Science materials, RULER, Social Emotional Approach by Yale University. 6  Schedule Adjustments: Common Planning time, targeted time-frames, teacher lesson plans, Professional Learning Time (Diverse Learning Sessions). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students in grades K-6 will show a 2% increase on the Teachers College Writing Rubrics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers College Writing Rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on a student school survey and teacher feedback across two years, the SLT decided to change the School wide social emotional program from Positive Action to RULER. Only 68.6% of students indicated that Positive Action helped with the social emotional atmosphere of the school. More than 2/3 of the student body thought the program was helping. In comparison to 88.7% of the student body indicating that PBIS helped with the social emotional atmosphere of the school. Teachers indicated that Positive Action was too childish for older students and did not get to the heart of many of the student issues. School Trends: Across two years, feedback and ratings for our current social emotional program dropped. Priority Needs: The implementation of a new social emotional program that addressed empathy and emotional intelligence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 70% of the students in grades 3-6 will be satisfied with the new social emotional approach, RULER, as evidenced by a school created survey given to students. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Begin implementing the new social emotional program, RULER, by providing PD for staff. Administrators, Teachers, paraprofessionals, school aides and office staff. This will be monitored in two cycles Rachel Barash and Brittany Sekesan, two teachers piloting the program. The Social Emotional Committee, which consists of teachers, paraprofessionals, school aides, administrators and the parent coordinator will create a plan for the implementation of the program in and out of classrooms. Students October 2018- January 2019 and January 2019 - March 2019. This will be monitored in two cycles October 2018- January 2019 and January 2019 - March 2019. Social Emotional Committee Administration and teacher leads will conduct monthly meetings to support RULER and will conduct learning walks in cycles across the school year. Teachers and Administration This will be monitored Classroom Teachers and administration. 9  in two cycles October 2018- January 2019 and January 2019 - March 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to participate in RULER lessons and RULER assemblies once a month. Teachers will also create videos and workshops for parents around RULER. The PA will designate a Parents' Association liaison for RULER. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, Guidance Counselor, School Aides, Parent Coordinator and Parents Instructional Resources: RULER Social Emotional Curriculum, surveys, and materials needed. Schedule Adjustments: Teacher program cards to reflect the 3 weekly RULER Social Emotional learning lessons and monthly RULER Assemblies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of the students in grades 3-6 will indicate that they are satisfied with the new social emotional curriculum, RULER. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 0  Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the ELA, the school has consistently scored more than 40% higher than the city and the state in the last three years. Additionally, in Mathematics, the school has consistently scored more than 40% higher than the city and the state in the last three years. For the past three years, over 95% of students consistently passed the state Science test. 78% of students passed the Common Core State ELA test in the 2017-2018 school year. 80% of students passed Math Common Core test in grades 3-6. 96% of the fourth grade students passed the state Science test. The school has been rated “Well Developed” on the Quality Review and acording to the NYC School Survey 2013-2014 and 2015-2016. In the 2016-2017 school year, all teachers were rated "Effective" and "Highly Effective" on their end of the year evaluations. The school-wide trends; Although state assessments are in the 70th and 80th percentile, none of the teachers chose to conduct inter-visitations as part of their evaluations. Yet, teachers on SLT share the overall sentiment that teachers believe in the value of learning from one another and observing colleagues providing instruction. The priority goal; For teachers to grow in their pedagogical practices by observing one another without the inter-visitation being connected to their end of the year evaluations. As a result, teachers observation rating will increase, particularly in Questioning and Discussion, which our school instructional goal will be focused on. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 30% of teachers will voluntarily participate in inter-visitations provided by selected teachers as evidenced by the completion of reflection forms conducted by all participating teachers. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will develop an inter-visitation protocol. All Teachers Administration This will be monitored in two times Administration and instructional cabinet will select teachers that will be visited for particular strengths. The list and protocol will be provided to all teachers. Administration, instructional cabinet, selected teachers October 2018 - January 2019, January 2019 - March 10 2019. This will be monitored in two times Assistant Principal, participating teachers. October 2018 - January 2019, January 2019 - March 10 2019. Teachers who choose to conduct the inter-visitation and the selected teachers who are being visited will complete the process by submitting a reflection form. Participating teachers This will be monitored in two times Administration and participating teachers. October 2018 - January 2019, January 2019 - March 10 2019. 3 Teachers will be surveyed about the quality of the inter-visitations and the protocol process. Participating teachers This will be monitored in two times Administration and teachers October 2018 - January 2019, January 2019 - March 10 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be an SLT Newsletter that highlights what we are doing for teacher collaboration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, Instructional Cabinet, Data Support Instructional Resources: Professional Study Books, Professional Videos, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Curriculum materials, GoMath curriculum materials Schedule Adjustments: Common Preps for Inter-visitations. Visiting teachers will change their schedule. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 15% of teachers will have participated in inter-visitations as per the completed reflection forms. Teachers will also be surveyed about the quality of the inter-visitations and the protocol. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Surveys 4  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Quality Review (2013; 2016) the school rated ‘Well-developed’ for, “ Establishing a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families and provides supports to achieve those expectations.” In order to maintain a well-developed status, school leaders will continue to communicate high expectations and set up systems that lend themselves to developing school leaders. According to the NYC School Survey (2018), there was a rating of 4.55 out of 5 for Effective School Leadership, 4.55 for Strong Family-Community Ties, and 4.21 for Trust. All of which showed an increase from 2017. Effective Leadership impacted student outcomes. 78% percent of the students scored on or above grade level on the New York State English Language Arts state exam. 80% of the students scored on or above grade level on the New York State Math exam. NYC School Survey rating for Effective School Leadership was 4.55 in 2018. School trends show; The school leaders communicate high expectations and have structures to support distributive leadership among teachers and parents. Priority need; To receive more consistent feedback from classroom teachers, cluster teachers and paraprofessionals on the effectiveness of the Monday PD in regards to its effectiveness in supporting coherent instructional. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 6  By June, 2019, 70% of teachers and paraprofessionals will give positive feedback on a survey concerning the Monday Professional Development sessions in regards to its effectiveness in supporting coherent instruction that led to student achievement. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create weekly on-line surveys for the Monday PD. Teachers and paraprofessionals This will be monitored in two times Administration Analyze the surveys to look for trends and the need for any adjustments. Administration Provide differentiated professional development cycles Classroom teachers, Special Education teachers, Cluster teachers Administration Administration October 2018 - January 2019, January 2019 - March 10 2019. This will be monitored in two times October 2018 - January 2019, January 2019 - March 10 2019. This will be monitored in two times October 2018 - January 2019, January 2019 - March 10 2019. 8 Continually make ongoing adjustments to the PD calendar based on the results of the surveys. Administration Administration This will be monitored in two times October 2018 - January 2019, January 2019 - March 10 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. SLT Newsletter highlighting what teachers are studying in professional development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, Instructional Cabinet, Data Support Instructional Resources: Professional Study Books, Professional Videos, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Curriculum materials, GoMath curriculum materials Schedule Adjustments: Monday PD, Professional Learning Calendar, Professional Learning Team Protocols. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 40% of the teachers and paraprofessionals will give positive feedback on the effectiveness of the Monday PD in regards to its effectiveness to support coherent instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Currently, the school has a strong partnership with the Parents' Association. As a result, there are several community based organizations that conduct residencies at our school such as Ballroom Dancing, TADA, Mad Science, etc.. In addition, the Parents' Association sponsors an after school program in which other community based organizations partner with the school to provide after school services. Some of these organizations are Soccer Friends, Thinking Caps, etc. Over the years, the school has partnered with PENCIL, Barnes and Noble, NYC Libraries, Fire Department and other community based organizations. However, these partnerships have been random and not always tied to the curriculum. School Trends; School partners with Community Based Organizations. Priority Need;Strategically partner with Community Based Organizations that can enhance the school's curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop a school based program called, "Community as Learning Partners" by fostering partnerships with at least 3 outside organizations that would enhance the school's curriculum in order to expose our students to real world experiences. By doing so, we will increase student engagement by connecting our curriculum to real world experiences for our students. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop a committee of teachers and parents who would seek out and set up partnerships with CBO's that could enhance the curriculum. The partnerships can be by grade or whole school. Teachers and parents This will be monitored in two times Administration, teachers and PA. October 2018 - January 2019, January 2019 - March 10 2019. Appoint a parent and teacher liaison for each grade who would work with the CBO to develop the plan for the partnership. Parents and teachers This will be monitored in two times Parent Association and Teachers October 2018 - January 2019, January 2019 - March 10 2019. September 2018-June 2019 Parents Meet the Teacher Night will be utilized to recruit parents for the committee as well as grade liaisons. Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Other CBO's that support parent and community engagement. P.S. 101Q Parents' Association 2  Scholastic Books Pupil Path/ Skedula Fire Department Community House St. Luke's Thinking Caps Mad Science Soccer Friends Chess Wizards Queens Botanical Gardens Dancing Classrooms Teachers College Reading and Writing Project RULER, Yale University Power Brain Solar One Magic Box Queens Borough President Melinda Katz Council Member Karen Kolslowitz Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal, Instructional Cabinet, Data Support Instructional Resources: Professional Study Books, Professional Videos, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Curriculum materials, Go Math curriculum materials. Schedule Adjustments: Professional Learning Calendar, Professional Learning Team Protocols, Common Prep Agendas, Circular 6 Agendas. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 1 CBO will be established and will partner with the school to enhance the school curriculum. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Number of community based organizations that partner with our school. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) On Demand Writing Pieces, and Running Records, ELA State Test Mathematics Go Math Pre Assessments, Math State Test, Math Simulated State Test Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Small group strategy lessons, small group read aloud, components of balanced literacy in small group. Pull out additional small group instruction with RTI provider. Small group strategy lessons, and one to one conferring. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one to one instruction. During the day Small group and one to one conferring. During the day Small group and one to one conferring. During the day Small group and one to one instruction. During the day Small group and one to one instruction. During the day Pull out additional small group instruction with RTI provider. Reteach concepts in small group instruction or one to one conferring. Reteach concepts in small group instruction or one to one conferring SETTS, Guidance and Speech On Demand Writing Pieces, Flash Drafts, Teacher Conference Notes, and Running Records On Demand Writing, Flash Drafts, Teacher Conference Notes, and Running Records Parent Request, Teacher Request Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, 5 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not a Title I School Not a Title I School Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  0 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $ 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The hiring committee consist of administrators and teachers. Hires forgo and four step process to ensure that HQT are hired. Level one interviews are conducted by teachers or administrators. Only certified teachers are invited to Level one. Level two interviews are conducted by the principal. Level three interviews consist of a demonstration lesson with students in which teachers and administrators are present and provide feedback. Level four interviews consist of a writing sample from the possible hire. If the candidate meets satisfaction at all levels, the hires credentials are verified by HR at the Support Center before an offer is made. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school leaders, which includes teachers meet regularly and participate in a school retreat to decide professional development needs. Teachers College partners with the school to provide PD for teachers. In addition, teachers who are experts in their subject areas such as special education, math, science and Social Studies provide PD for colleagues. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not a TA School 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 9  P.S. 101 is not a TA School. However, no children in Pre-K are removed from their classroom during the school day. Any services provided are provided in the classroom as a push in program. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The Pre-K teachers attend all professional development with elementary school teachers to align curriculum. The Pre-K teachers share records and any early intervention services with the elementary school teachers when reorganization happens in June. There is a Kindergarten orientation in which all Pre-K parents are invited to. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The school leadership team is decided between the UFT and Principal. The team decides the assessment criteria. The team also decides the professional development needs for the year at the school retreat. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal $1,952.00 0 $12,366.00 0 $2,602 $4,186,891 Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 1   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) ***Note*** We are not a Title I school. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 101 Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. I. School Responsibilities: 3  Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 101 Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; 4  ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 5  ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 101 Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum The school will provide a high quality curriculum for ELA by using the Teachers College Reading and Writing Units of Study. Fundations will be used for phonemic awareness instruction as needed. Fundations will in addition to the Teachers College Phonic portion of the program. Go Math will be used for mathematical instruction, along with supplements to the curriculum. Harcourt Science and the NYC Scope and Sequence for Social Studies. The school will support the home-school relationships by providing the following: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Opportunities for parents to meet with teachers regularly Teacher created videos concerning academics to support parents Teacher created monthly newsletters and parent guides to support parents Opportunities for parents to visit classrooms during our social emotional programmed lessons. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 6  ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 7  ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities 8  ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Analysis of the data from the TC running records reveals that our ENL students require print rich materials with picture support. They also learn best through hands on activities. Therefore we wanted to create after school activities that incorporated both. Our school will be offering an after school program for our ENL students in all proficiency levels. The classes will be taught by two licensed ENL teachers,. We will be providing supplemental instruction in English and in alignment with the NYS ENL Learning Standards, New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Invitation letters , in their preferred language, will be sent to the families three weeks prior to the start of the program. Attendance will be taken at the beginning of each session. If students are absent for more than two consecutive sessions, the teacher will make a follow up call to find out the reason for the absence. ENL After School Program The ENL After School Program will be held on Wednesdays beginning on January 3 - June 5, 2019 servicing students in grades 2-5. The students will be divided into two groups - grades 2 & 3 and grades 4&5. The sessions will begin at 2:20pm-4 pm.There will be an ENL teacher for each group of students. There will be an additional session on Thursdays for grades 2 & 3. The Thursday after school program will be held from January 4 - June 7, 2019. The sessions will begin at 2:20pm-4 pm.The ENL teachers will provide opportunities to use Imagine Learning and other online sites to enrich their vocabulary, improve language acquisition and reading comprehension. They will also use board games that focus on building vocabulary. There will be no allocation for a supervisor because the PA after school program runs concurrently and there's already an assigned supervisor for the building. ENL Saturday Academy The ENL Saturday Academy will be held on Saturdays in March and April servicing students in grades 3-5. The students will be divided in 2 groups depending on student participation. The 2 ENL teachers will work from 8am -10:45am. The students will be in attendance from 9-10:30am. There will be a supervisor present from 8-10:45am. The students will focus on reading comprehension, with an emphasis on main idea as well as mathematical concepts and vocabulary. 1  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III Professional Development Program is designed to strenghten teacher practice by addressing strategies that promote academic language development, using technology and analyzing ELL data from various sources. The ESL teacher will receive training from Teachers' College throughout the year for a minimum of 10 days. Each of the trainings are for 90 minute sessions; those dates and topics are to be determined. In addition, she will attend other Professional Development sessions provided by the Borough Field Support Center of ELLs throughout the school year.; those dates and topics are to be determined. All of the PD sessions ENL teacher attends, there will be an agenda detailing the content of the workshop and then a debriefing session with her supervisor. All of the Professional Development received by the ENL students is expected to improve ENL instruction., pedagogy. This impact will be assessed in the Spring 2019 NYSESLAT testing. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We asked parents for their topics of interest during Meet the Teacher Night and parent orientations. Based on their responses, we will offer workshops , after school on Tuesdays - 2:20-3:35pm for our parents of ENL's. Parents will be sent notices through email and flyers to be sent home requesting their participation. We will use the translation services by phone and in print provided by the DOE upon request. The ENL teacher, Ms. Rao, will conduct parent workshops that are ENL related. Attendance will be taken and agendas will be distributed in preferred languages. Workshop topics and months are: December 18, 2018 from 2:20-3:35pm-"How to support your beginning learner", March 12, 2019 from 2:20-3:35pm- "Strategies to support your child for the upcoming city and state testing", and May 14, 2019 from 2:20-3:35pm- "Summer Fun - activities to you can do with your child to assist them in improving their literacy skills." 2  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7,373.29  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $1,236.60 and curriculum development contracts. $272.30 Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $2,247.21 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. ENL After School Program 2 ESL teachers per session on Wednesday (1 hr & 40 min. per class) $55.23 x 29 x 2 teachers = $3,203.34 1 ESL teacher per session on Thursday (1 hr & 40 min per class ) $55.23 x 26 hrs = $1,435.98 2 ESL teachers per session for Saturdays (2 hr & 45 min) $55.23 x 16.5 x 2 teachers = $1,822.59 1 supervisor per session for Saturdays (2hr & 45 min) $55.23 x 16.5 =$911.30 Teachers' College Staff Developer - $1,236.60 ESL board games for each classroom to support instruction Imagine Learning 3 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Materials purchased for our parents population - brochures from the Parent Institute Travel Other TOTAL $1,236.60 $12,366 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name School in the Gardens Borough Queens School Number 101 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Monique Paniagua Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michelle Rao Teacher/Subject Area Danielle Ryf Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Kaminsky Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Mabel Sarduy Assistant Principal Irtis Gonzalez Coach type here School Counselor TBD Parent type here Parent Coordinator TBD Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Laura Fahey, A.P. C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 660 5 Total number of ELLs 50 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.58%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Teachers College for the reading and writing workshop. The data provides insight by recognizing if the student is at an early emergent level or not. The quantitative data is the TC leveled reading score. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers formally assess students four times a year and perform additional assessments as needed.. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the NYSESLAT scores, state tests to evaluate the success of our ENL program. NYSESLAT scores are reviewed at the beginning of the year to set goals for the program and target ELL students for small group instruction. 6  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Small group instruction by the classroom teachers of ENL students as well as the integrated model required by New York State are the structures we have in place to address interventions. Additionally we will purchase a software program - Imagine Learning. The teachers and students are familiar with using the programs as of last May 2017 to support their academic progress. For Kindergarten through grade 1 will use TCRWP phonics instruction and grade 2 students we continue with a double dose of Fundations instruction to improve phonemic awareness. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (Rti) framework by examining running records levels, looking at Go Math assessments, teacher observations, and small group and individually one to one conferences. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the NYSESLAT state test along with the ELA, Math and Science state tests are used to evaluate and inform our ELL program. The workshop model of instruction is used in order to provide opportunities for listening, reading, speaking, writing, and math. We also use the unit chapter tests in math and published writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to make adjustments to our ELL program, ENL teacher, special education and general education teachers collaborate to review the results of the data collected - ongoing informal assessments, conferencing, on demand writing pieces and small group instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ENL program organizational model for grades K-6 is a combination Push-In (Integrated) and Pull Out (Stand Alone) model. Our ENL program features students of heterogeneous or mixed proficiency levels in each class. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As determined by the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT testing results and state mandates, there are currently 7 entering students, 5 emerging students, 11 transitioning students, 17 expanding students, and 10 commanding students. A schedule is developed by the ENL teacher and reviewed by an administrator. The entering and emerging students are serviced 8 periods a week for a total of 360 minutes. For this mandate, the students are serviced 4 periods of stand alone and 4 periods of integrated ENL. The transitional students receive 4 periods of ENL services per week; which can either be 4 periods of 7  integrated or 2 periods of integrated and 2 periods of stand alone totaling 180 minutes per week. The expanding students received 4 periods of integrated ENL services per week for a total of 180 minutes. Commanding students receive 2 periods a week of integrated ENL services for a total of 90 minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL Program addresses the ENL students’ needs, while aligning their goals and lessons to the ENL state standards. The instructional strategy used is the TCRW Project, using the workshop model for instruction in reading and writing. In addition ENL instruction is also delivered using ENL strategies, hands-on activities, visuals, role-playing and differentiated instruction. Common preparation periods are used to align lesson plans with the classroom teachers. Instructional materials include picture and bilingual dictionaries, leveled classroom libraries, visuals, Imagine Learning for selected students, books on tape. The ENL library, and selected classroom libraries contain native home language books. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ENL students in the Free Standing ENL Program are evaluated in English since English is the language of instruction. However, ENL students in the testing grades are provided with the translated versions of State exams and bilingual glossaries whenever available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for ENLs according to their proficiency level on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT state tests. Students are provided with the opportunity for hands-on activities, visuals, and role-playing. ENL newcomers, SIFE students and long term ENLs are offered a Title III After school program to improve language development. In addition, we have implemented a technology program called Imagine Learning to help develop language and literacy skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL-SWD students are provided with the same grade-level materials as general education students but with additional scaffolds such as graphic organizers to help them organize information. ENL-SWD have access to high interest non fiction reading materials to ensure that they can read at either their independent or instructional level. ENL students are given bilingual glossaries for social studies, science, math and ELA to use in their classrooms throughout the year. During the stand alone portion of the ENL program, bilingual dictionaries are made available to the students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL-SWDs students are placed in ICT and general education classrooms with access to all curricular materials. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted small group instruction for ENLs in ELA, Math and all content areas are available for all subgroups. Classroom and the ENL teacher set clear goals and assess ENLs on an ongoing basis. This helps determine student academic progress and his/her level of English language acquistion. Intervention services offered in our school include: Title III After school program, Imagine Learning computer program as well as small group instruction within the classroom. Students are offered double dose of Fundations instruction in grade 2. Students in grades kindergarten and 1st will use a new TC phonics program. 8  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Programs or improvements for the upcoming school year include the TC Word Study Program for grades K and 1; Fundations for grade 2. This will provide extra support for ENLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All of our ENLs have equal access to all school programs including access to computers, in the technology room and their classrooms. We offer PA after school programs as well as Title III After School program. Special education services are offered when indicated. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Every classroom has a large multicultural library of fiction and non-fiction books. Additionally, Kindergarten and first grade students will use the TC Word Study Program. Grade 2 will continue with Fundations and all grades use TCRW project. Kindergarten through sixth grade use Go Math. Computer programs available for our ENLs include: Imagine Learning, Starfall, and Scholastic magazine. Picture Dictionaries by Harcourt Brace and The New Oxford Picture Dictionaries are available in English as well as Russian and Chinese. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed by using the home language survey. Based on this survey additionally resources may be purchased to use in the ENL program. We hire a translator, as needed, during the NYS Math and Science tests. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All NYS Title III mandates are met when a determination is made as to the students levels. All ENLs have access to NYS Core Curriculum. Each student is placed in their age appropriate grade upon entry into our school. We continue to require and additional 2 day a week ENL teacher. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At Pre-K and Kindergarten registration, the ENL teacher and the Pupil accounting secretary make sure registration runs smoothly. Students are interviewed with their parents. The ENL teacher makes sure the home language survey is completed accurately. Incoming ENL students and their parents are offered the opportunity to attend a parent orientation with the ENL teacher. We also have a Kindergarten orientation in June where parents of newly enrolled students get to see the Kindergarten classes and get a tour of the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 9  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers attend in-house PD presented by the school administration and teachers on various CCLS related topics. During Deeping the Content of Knowledge planning ENL teacher will bring ENL strategies and resources into the curriculum to support ENL students in the lower grades. During selected common preparation periods, classroom teachers meet with the ENL teacher to discuss strategies to support their ENL students. ENL teachers are invited to attend meetings from the support center as well as Office of ENLs workshops. Teacher's College Coach meets with the ENL teacher to discuss and implement different ENL strategies to be used during the TC Units of Study in reading and writing with the varied levels of students and ways to meet the Common Core Learning Standards for all students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL Professional Development will take place during the designated Chancellor's Conference Days, common planning time, outside conferences and workshops provided by the Office of English New Language Learners, and ENL support center. Professional development sessions will be facilitated by administrators, teachers and outside professional development providers. ENL teacher will provide and show best practices to be used in the classroom for ENL students and share resources available to reach ENL students at all different levels during selected C6 periods. Any PD's attended by the ENL teacher will be turn-keyed for fellow staff members. Evidence of ENL Professional Development, such as agendas, sign-in sheets, etc. will be kept on file and maintained by the ENL teacher and designated administrator. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teacher reaches out to and meets with parents of ENL students on Tuesdays during parent involvement/engagement hours as well as during teacher preparation times. Translation is provided for the parent if needed through the Office of Translation Services. Parents look at the students work over time and next steps are explained to parents to help their child improve both at home and school and in all content areas. It is also explained to the parents the different levels of language acquisition. During the parent orientation the ENL teacher meets with small groups of parents to discuss ENL strategies to help their child at home in reading, writing, math, and other content areas. Also, ENL teacher sends out a survey asking parents what they would like to learn more about to support their child. Based on the feedback small groups are formed to meet the needs of the parents. Translation services are available to parents by our identified bilingual staff if translation assistance is needed by the ENL teacher and parent. Bilingual staff languages include: French, Portuguese, Italian, Bengali, Hebrew, and Spanish. 0  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. P.S. 101 will hold several workshops for parents on various topics including but not limited to : test prep and special education services. We also host several parent nights such as family movie night, and international dinner to promote parental involvement. We also have monthly parents as learning partners where the parents can conduct a lesson for the class. We have Read Across America and Career Day where parents are involved in these activities. The parent coordinator sends out weekly newsletters and calendars via email listing the various school activities. The school website is updated with the latest information for parents and parents are encouraged to visit the website regularly to stay informed. The role of the Parent Coordinator s is to communicate regularly with parents and is the liaison between parents and the school. We use the assistance of the Office of Translation and Interpretation for written and oral communication when necessary. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Monique Lopez-Paniagua, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS101 School DBN: 28Q101 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Monique Paniagua Title Principal Irtis Gonzalez Assistant Principal TBD Parent Coordinator Michelle Rao ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Danielle Ryf Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Kaminsky Teacher/Subject Area Laura Fahey Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other A.P. Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 9/18/18 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q101 School Name: School in the Gardens Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No TBD TBD Pupil Accounting Secretary No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Needs Assessment was done based on the Home Language Identification Survey to determine the languages spoken in our school. This information is provided to administration, teachers, service providers, and the Parent Coordinator. As needed, translated documents are provided for workshops and parent meetings in the necessary languages; i.e. Chinese, Spanish, Russian and Japanese. In addition, the Adult Preferred Language Report is used to determine the preferred language of communication for parents. The findings of this report (RAPL) are used to determine the necessary languages for oral and written communication with parents. According to the RAPL report, the languages with high incidence besides English are Chinese, Spanish, Russian and Japanese. Consultation with the school’s ELL teacher to determine the number of ELL children and their home language to ensure that written translation is provided where necessary. Data from ATS will be provided by the pupil accounting secretary to facilitate written and oral translation when necessary. The parent coordinator will distribute a letter to all staff members at the beginning of the year to make them aware of the opportunities 4  provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit to communicate with parents in their home language either orally or written. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Chinese Japanese Georgian Uzbek Arabic Russian German Bengali Albanian Cantonese Farsi Hebrew Mandarin Serbian Turkish 643 8 8 3 1 0 2 5 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 95.54 1.19 1.19 0.45 0.15 0 0.3 0.74 0 0.3 0 0 0.15 0 0 0 0 634 9 5 4 1 1 3 5 1 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 94.21 1.34 0.74 0.59 0.15 0.15 0.45 0.74 0.15 0.3 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.3 0.15 0.15 5  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families March- Kindergarten registration September November, March and May Varied September, February; and as needed for other after school programs translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated by State Education Department Translation Unit - documents given to the Unit six weeks prior to distribution Home Language Identification survey Welcome letter Parent Teacher Conference Notification Upcoming Special Events After School Program Information Entitlement, continued entitlement and Non-Entitlement letters 6  Translation Unit - as necessary Beginning of each school year Translation Unit- documents given to the Unit six weeks prior to distribution Translation Unit- documents given to the Unit six weeks prior to distribution Translated by State Education Department 7  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Back to School Night September 2018 provide interpretation service(s)? Based on parent request, we will use in house staff or reach out to the interpretation unit when needed. Parent/Teacher Conferences November 2018, March 2019 and May 2019 IEP Meetings Throughout the school year Based on parent request, we will use in house staff or reach out to the interpretation unit when needed. Based on parent request, we will use in house staff or reach out to the interpretation unit when needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The parent coordinator will send out a mass email to inform parents in the event of a school emergency. Using an online translation site, emails will be sent to these ENL families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In order to make all staff members aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, professional development will be provided in house. Letters will also be distributed to teachers informing them about the Translation and Interpretation Unit which will include the phone numbers to call if a translator is needed. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 8  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school has bilingual staff in the following languages - Spanish, Bengali, Hebrew, Portuguese, French, Farsi and Maltese. These teachers may be called upon for oral translation services. Teachers will be given the information regarding written and oral translation services provided by over the phone Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During parent meetings, using online translation sites, parents will be asked if they require additional support in their native language to improve communication between home and school. When requested, interpretation services or interpreters are utilized. 9 
