 24Q102 School Name: P.S. 102 BAYVIEW Principal: CATHY WEINSTEIN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S./I.S. 102Q- Bayview School 24Q102 342400010102 PK, K, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, SE School Number (DBN): 55-24 Van Horn Street, Elmhurst, NY 11373 718-446-3308 Phone Number: 718-672-3101 Fax: Catherine Weinstein cweinstein3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Catherine Weinstein Email Address: Sharon DelVecchio & Maureen Falesto Arlene Le Sharon DelVecchio Elizabeth Wolf N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 24 Madeline Taub-Chan Superintendent: 98-50 50 th Avenue, Corona, NY 11368 Superintendent’s Office Address: mchan2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-592-3357 Phone Number: FSC: QPN 718-592-3770 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast   28-11 Queens Plaza North, Long Island City, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-5488 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Catherine Weinstein Sharon DelVecchio Arlene Le Kristen Roberts Elizabeth Wolff Amanda Arlequin Jessica Beltran Marcella Medina Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jennifer Alviar Nancy Umana Bernadette Wright Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher/SLT Chair Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Think for Yourself; Care for Others. Section 4: CEP Overview   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S./I.S. 102Q is a community school located in Elmhurst, Queens (District 24) comprised of approximately 1325 students from Pre-Kindergarten through 8 th grade. We are an ethnically diverse community that is home to many new immigrant families from China, the Philippines, South America, South Asia, Southeast Asia, and Europe, which is a source of pride for the entire community as P.S/I.S. 102Q is representative of the multi-ethnic makeup of Queens, NY. P.S./I.S. 102Q is an inclusive learning community. Administration, teachers, parents, and students work collaboratively to provide a rigorous, academically challenging educational experience for all learners. Parent involvement, through the School Leadership Team, an active Parents’ Association, parent volunteers, parent workshops, and weekly parent outreach keep parents well-informed, involved and continually updated on all aspects of their child’s education. After three years of instructional focus on designing instruction for thinking, the best practices we've discovered in the three years will now be scaled school-wide. We believe that thinking, not doing, is the key that unlocks rigorous learning and all of our systems, ranging from discipline to daily lessons to remedial support, will be focused on increasing the opportunity for students to shoulder the cognitive load in learning. Instead of asking students to copy sentences in "thinking" graphic organizers, we simply entrust with the responsibility to think for themselves. And moving away from the practice of teaching students to "write" by answering multiple choice questions regarding topics as author's theme, we support them to communicate authentic ideas and through writing work that carries meaning beyond the classroom walls. Teachers at P.S./I.S. 102Q are all highly qualified and hold multiple teaching certifications in multiple areas. We seek to invest in people and not products, and ongoing instructional support is provided through a Literacy Coach, STEM coach, as well as ELA and Math Leads on both the Elementary and Middle School level. A School Climate Team will also provide in-the-moment support as they are charged with the active uncovering of students' socio-emotional needs. Collaborative professional learning teams focus on analyzing common student work samples and adjusting current and future units of study and upcoming lessons to align with grade-level and class-specific trends to increase student progress. This ongoing, peer-reviewed support provides our pedagogical staff with the necessary tools and skills to positively impact student progress and performance. Teachers working in conjunction with out-of-classroom support staff and administrators have ownership in the development and implementation of a standards-based curriculum and instructional program. Students receive targeted instruction using the most up-to-date research-based best practices in literacy and math. Teachers at P.S./I.S. 102Q are encouraged to share tested pedagogical practices that may benefit other teachers and groups of students through the use of peer-to-peer classroom Inter-visitations. For the past three years, teachers engaged in rounds of action research, and our successes in meeting our CEP goals last year can be chiefly attributed to these authentic adult learning opportunities. Students at P.S./I.S. 102Q receive a rigorous, academically challenging education. In addition to the Core Curriculum, students receive instruction from specialists in Science, Technology, the Arts, and Physical Education. The Cultural Arts are an integral part of school life. Students participate in visual, performance, and musical arts residencies including, Center for Architecture , Wingspan, Arts Horizon, LEAP, Jazz at Lincoln Center, Carnegie Hall, Young Runners supported by New York Road Runners, CHAMPS, cheer leading, and the Middle School Basketball League. A school band, chorus, and visual arts clubs provide students with creative outlets to foster unique talents and expose students to different 0  avenues of learning. Technology is woven into the school day as students have access to computers, tablets, Promethean Boards and Smart Boards in all content areas. Technology residencies, Games for Change, and portable computer labs support student engagement and learning. Designated classes receive ENL, RTI, or AIS. Enrichment and academic intervention is provided to all classes. Greater Ridgewood Youth Council (GRYC) hosts a SONYC After-School program for Middle School students providing homework assistance, recreational activities, and day trips during extended school breaks. GRYC also host a parent supported program for students in Kindergarten through 5th grade. Our students participate in several health and social awareness fund-raising campaigns: Sustainability Drive to collect clothing, our Annual Food Drive, Pennies for Patients and Treats for Troops. Additionally, community support is evident through the many grants received to support teaching and learning. We have received grants from Donors Choose , which aids our teachers with creating innovative classroom projects. P.S./I.S. 102Q is host to a variety of school-wide events, which brings the entire school community together. Parents, students, teachers, and administrators come together and celebrate accomplishments and seasonal events such as Games for Change sponsored by Councilman Daniel Dromm, The Bayview Players, Pumpkin Patch, The 100 th Day of School, Winter and Spring Concerts, Art Expo, Earth Day/Arbor Day, Career Day, Math Ninja Warrior, 102's Got Talent, Battle of the Bands, Family Fun Fitness, Paint Night, STEM Con, the annual Elmhurst Carnival, Ping Chong + Company. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. All students are individuals and have specific needs, and PS/IS102Q is committed to personalizing all of our students' education experiences for the nine years they are with us. Whether they are Students with Disabilities, LGBT, Asian, Hispanic, in temporary housing, or not belonging to a category defined by the department of education, they need to be understood and heard 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We created focus standards in both ELA and Math that became the foundation for our student growth and we monitored the students' success with these focus standards in our 102 + Intervention program. In K-5, we utilized our schedules by creating AIS and RTI instruction in small targeted groups. As students progressed in these focus standards, their instruction became more rigorous. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q102 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1326 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 55 53 32 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 34 26 41 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 75.9% % Reduced Lunch 14.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 32.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.57 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 59.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 96% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 125 125 6 96.1% 8.9% 13.3% 2.9% 60.9% 0.9% 6 14% 6.9 64.1% 88% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Historical data reveals that although our students perform at a high level as a collective, we are making below average impact in mathematics. Our students in the lowest third do not improve their performance as rapidly as their city Comparison Group counterparts, and their achievements stand in stark contrast to their non-lowest third peers in our school. Moving our level I math students became an immediate need and a CEP goal last year, and our school executed a dramatic new instructional program for grades 3-5 that has already led early promising results. Compared with a consistent number of level I students from year to year--25% of all state test-takers--this year that number was reduced to 5%. For the 2017 to 2018 school year, the priority shifts to moving students from level 2 to level 3. Level III and higher performances require students to focus their cognitive abilities on problem-solving and thinking. Students who lack number and arithmetic fluency must allocate significant cognitive attention towards basic foundational math skills when solving high-level problems, and thus their challenge is compounded when the students with sufficient foundational math skills can invest their thinking fully in high-level domains. In order for teachers to engage in focused professional dialogue and learning to impact math student learning, teachers must be able to focus on teacher one discipline instead of four each day. Beginning in September 2016, all teachers in grades 3-5 were departmentalized as either Humanities or STEM, and each will have the opportunity to learn, apply, and refine 21st century instruction in content-specific teams. STEM teachers in grades 3-5 will engage in ongoing job-embedded professional learning to deliver rigorous math instruction using modern curriculum and approaches. 3  A dedicated math interventionist will deliver tier 2 intervention to students performing at the lowest third according to unit exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, all K-2 teacher teams will create and administer at least two rounds of performance-based assessments on foundational math fluency. Student outcomes will be used to guide curriculum, classroom instruction, as well as identify students needing services from our Personalized Learning team. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? STEM coach supports each of the three teacher teams to consult with grade 3-5 math teachers to identify power K-2 math standards ALL October 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers, Push-In Support Staff, & Coach Teacher inquiry teams engage in job-embedded professional learning to routinize the use of blended learning tools to support students in developing core math fluency skills. Gen. Ed., ELL, SWD, STH Calendar and administer rounds of common Performance tasks in math classes grades K-2 throughout the year to provide teachers with meaningful data. Math interventionists identifies lowest third across grades to deliver personalized and hyper-focused instruction to at-risk students. ELL, SWD, STH ELL, SWD, STH January 2019 - June 2019 October 2018 - April 2019 STEM coach and K-2 team members STEM coach, AP. K-2 staff September 2018 - June 2019 Personalized Learning Team Math interventionists, AP 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Develop and host student+Parent Math Learning Workshops Continue to have ongoing communication grounded in achievement and standards Continue to leverage blended learning programs to support math learning at home Continue to host our annual STEM-Con Continue to host Math Ninja Warrior and Math-lypmics Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5  Whenever their teacher cannot report to the school, students often lose instructional time when the city's sub-central system is unable to consistently provide schools with appropriate substitute teachers. To mitigate this issue, the school is allocating funds to have an increased amount of teachers at each grade tasked with providing intervention and to cover classes for members of their own grade team. Per-session has been scheduled for both curriculum and assessment planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly PLC meetings focused on improving instructional practices by reviewing common assessment data; curriculum adjustments after school-wide curriculum check ins (3X annually), and ongoing online assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher-created math performance tasks, GoMath online assessments, Midterm assessment, Performance-based assessments such as Math NInja Warrior. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Improved systems for monitoring behavior incidents surfaced a significant number of incidents that result in teacher removals or Principal's suspensions the prior school year. These disciplinary actions were part of a response to address unfortunate, consequential, yet we believe preventable offenses that can be addressed through explicit socio-emotional learning such as the basic respect for space, personal privacy, collaborative norms, language, etc. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. All climate members will provide all students in Grades 2-8 with character education curriculum. 100% of all students in grades 2-4 will receive social emotionally driven assemblies 5 times a year. 100% of students in Grades 5-8 will participate in character education assemblies for at least 50% of the school year. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All STH Sept 2018-June 2019 Nov 2018-June 2019 All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 School Climate Team Guidance Counselor Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Dean, Social Worker, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, School Aides Principals, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Social Worker, Dean, Parent Coordinator, Teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Climate Team will design and implement coordinated learning plans across grades 3-8 Social-Emotional based after-school program in conjunction with Greater Ridgewood Youth Council (GRYC) to service high-need students Positive Behavior Interventions & Supports for all staff to align their classroom management systems to and for staff to use when interacting with all student populations. A centralized logging system will also be used to document school interactions with parents and students to identify and monitor the socio-emotional development of at-risk students. Parent Workshops/Parent Events focusing on student social/emotional wellness. Parents & Students Oct. 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops facilitated by the SCT along with the Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Dean, Social Worker, Teachers, Paraprofessional 8  Schedule Adjustments: Three teachers will work half instructional programs and half "School Climate Coordinator" positions to assist the Dean, Social Worker, and Guidance Counselor Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, staff reports (teachers, guidance, dean) will review student incidents, identify positive trends and the systems that promote them and identify the static or negative trends and amend the systems to promote positive results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff will use OORS reports, teacher referrals, and internal school incident reports to assess the needs of the students for advisories and assemblies. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As we enter our third year with TCRWP , the focus of Professional Development and TC Staff training was for the Readers Workshop and small group work. The need for a focused look at Writers Workshop is evident. In order for teachers to teach and track student performance in writing, teachers must move away from the traditional 10 component rubric supplied by TC and focus on writing skills that are evident in all genres of writing. Beginning in September 2017, Humanities teachers in grades 3-5 will align writing rubrics to measure key writing areas. There will be a cohesive vision across the grades horizontally and within the grade band vertically. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of the collaboration between grade team teachers, RtI, ENL, and SPED staff toward a renewed focus on writing, grade 3-5 students will score 5% higher than citywide average on ELA writing in addition to completing an annual portfolio of performance-based writing assessments. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Humanities teachers will work in grade teams to identify the writing areas that will increase student writing performance over the course of the school year. All students in K-2 Sept 2018-Oct 2019 Ongoing job-embedded professional learning via curriculum planning sessions guided by end of unit essays/writing pieces All students in K-2 Summer 2018- Incorporation of the Passport to Social Studies curriculum to provide additional writing opportunities in content specific areas (i.e., relationship between cultures, historical events, geographic locations) in specific writing genres (i.e., argument, persuasive, informational). All students in K-2 June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 3-5 Humanities Teachers, TC Staff Developer, Push-In Support Teachers 3-5 Humanities Teachers, TC Staff Developer, Push-In Support Teachers T3-5 Humanities Teachers, TC Staff Developer, Push-In Support Teachers Literacy interventionists in each grade (3-5) identifies lowest third across grades to deliver personalized and hyper-focused instruction to at-risk students. Lowest third, ELL, SPED September 2018- June 2019 Literacy Interventionists 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Author's fair will showcase both student work as well as the strategies that can facilitate strong writing practices. A quarterly school publication will inform parents on the writing instruction and expectation at school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per-session opportunities both during summer and before-after school during the school year, coaches, staff developers and learning opportunities from TCRWP. 1  RtI and ENL teachers to provide intervention. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Interim assessments such as TCRWP writing samples, as well as ongoing F&P testing will provide teachers with data to engage in monthly meetings to improve practice. As a result of this collaborative learning process, we will see improvements in student outcomes every assessment cycle. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher-created Mini-Writing Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Part 1-Needs Assessment: This past school year we introduced a structured, centralized, and prescriptive program of intervention for ELA in grade K-2. It involved push in and pull out services to student that were 2 or more levels below the benchmark in reading (Teachers College). Those students were identified and pulled out for small group intervention 3-4 times a week for 30 minutes. They received intense word study instruction (Fundations) in order to gain skills that were not solid and would improve their reading levels. As the year progressed the interventionists also performed push in services in classes that had more students in need of support. We want to tighten this structure and scale the services into the upper elementary( 3-5). Additionally, families who are active in this partnership saw greater gains, highlighting the critical need for informed partnership between school and home. Intervention, especially, works best when it is timely, targeted, and fully understood and supported by all parties. Paper-based communication with families, unreliable, slow, and difficult to assess understanding between two parties, can longer suffice as a communication channel in schools. Efficient school systems for immediate communication with families does not take focus away from instruction; in fact, it enables it. Upgrading our school to use digital tools is a priority in improving instructional service. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 10% of our staff will take on new leadership roles in order to create a shared vision that translates to increased success in student achievement. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will be trained on new strategies for technology, ways to deliver effective PD and instructional sharing ALL Summer 2018 Opening day procedures will include gathering the email and mobile number of all families. All teaching staff K-8 Sept. 2018 Professional learning to support staff in communicating with families and developing an open line of communication about academic and social emotional progress of students All staff Oct. 2018-June 2019 By mid-winter break, all PID students will be assigned an online portfolio of resources and assignments that provide coaching, proficiency-based, and track progress to objectives that are aligned to the city's promotion portfolio. New teacher leaders will guide this process. PID Students February 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal, Assistant Principals, Computer Science Teacher, Technology Team Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, select pilot teachers, coaches How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. This initiative is about family communication, and the rationale will be shared in both PA meetings, Class Parents meetings, in print, in emails, and at meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional learning throughout the school year for staff, workshops by Parent Coordinator for parents, incentives for enrollment via Google Photos Albums Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 4  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. AP monthly monitoring and reporting of usage rate by class, by grade, and by content Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google Admin SDK Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parent engagement events such as Paint Night, Carnival, Family Fitness Fun Night, Talent Show, STEMCON, and the school production of Annie were all incredibly successfully and well-attended (100-1000 at each event). This year key professional learning time will be scheduled in September to prepare teachers in creating joint-learning workshops while parent-engagement and excitement are high at the first Parent Conference. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 25% more parents will attend school wide events, as well as events designated for their child's grade. These events will include parent led workshops and round table discussions that promote and link to our student assemblies and advisories. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? iPad checkout program for ENL families to provide responsive instruction to students at home ENL Families September 2018-June 2019 ELL coordinator Students will lead STEM inquiry workshops in order to show their learning to their families. Families November 2018 -March 2019 Classroom Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principals Parent Workshops will focus on the academic and social development of our student population in order to support our parent community. Families September 2018-June 2019 Carnival, Paint Night, Family Fitness Night and Parent/CornellStudent/Staff Soccer game to build trust and relationships that will then permeate to the classroom setting. Families October 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Classroom Teachers, Support Staff, Parent Coordinator, Community-Based Organizations, Administrators All school staff, students, families If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Cornell University Nutritional Health Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community Based Organization programs, teacher-led workshops, Parent Coordinator-led workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Parent-Coordinator, Assistant Principals, and classroom teachers will keep track of parent attendance and use the parent surveys to revise future workshops to address parent needs, while retaining practices that were well-received by the parent community. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The completion percentage of the parent survey and attendance at each event. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA Exam, interim assessments (TCRWP, STEM) Classsroomobservations F & P Benchmark Assessments (K-2) Mathematics NYS Math Exam, GoMathassessments, performance tasks, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Personalized learning via technology-based programs (Lexia, Achieve3000, SmartyAnts) Guided Reading, Small-group strategy lessons, Differentiated Entry Points Small-group strategy lessons, Differentiated Entry Points Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One-to-One Conferencing, Small Group, Homogeneous classes When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Early Morning Programs, push-in/pull-out services during the school day, After-School Programs One-to-One Conferencing, Early Morning Programs, Small Group, Math Exemplars Khan Academy, ST Math push-in/pull-out services during the school day, After-School Programs During the school day, After-School Program Science Social Studies 4 th Grade NYS Science Exam (for 5 th Grade), Unit Assessments Seeds of Science/Roots of Reading assessments End-of-unit assessments, TCRWPwriting samples Curriculum Compacting, One-to-One Conferencing, Hands-on Lab Practice Small Group ELA Reading Support Strategies ELA Reading Support Strategies, Social Studies Curriculum Small Group One-to-One Conferencing, During the school day 9  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) IEPs, Referrals, Western Queens counseling, Conflict-Resolution School Climate team data tracking embedded across content areas Peer Mediation, Individual or Group sessions During the school day Independent & Group Counseling sessions, Peer Mediation, Assembly Programs 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 86 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing will receive wrap-around services from arrival to dismissal. With the hiring of a Dean, social worker, and a guidance counselor, STH will each have a single shepherd who will monitor and respond to their academic and socio-emotional growth. The school has also partnered with Greater Ridgewood and The Boulevard Residence to pilot a door to door afterschool program to teach pro-social behavior to students via STEM learning. Students will remain at 102 afterschool 4 days a week, and The Boulevard will provide van service from the school to the residence on these days. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. As of the 2017-18 NYS BEDS Survey all of our teachers are highly qualified. Prospective teachers go through a multi-tiered interview process consisting of an interview with members of the administration and school support staff. All applicants possess the required license/certification for their particular assignments. Once a teacher is hired, they receive in-house professional development on specific pedagogical practices employed at P.S./I.S. 102Q from our literacy coaches, literacy leads, math leads, and mentor teachers. All new teachers that are required to receive mentoring services are assigned an official mentor aligned to their license area that is tracked within the Mentoring Tracking System . We currently recruit teachers who hold multiple certifications across grades, content areas, and specialty areas (i.e., Special Education and TESOL). Our teachers participate in various teacher-led school committees and are involved in professional learning groups to share best practices to develop and improve their practices to improve student outcomes. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Monday afternoons, from 2:40PM-4:00PM, is dedicated to Collaborative Learning where we promote the “Teachers teaching Teachers model.” Teachers lead professional development sessions on topics of high interest based on a needs assessment survey completed in September. Additionally, teachers will be working on a student analysis protocol, which gives each teacher on a grade-level opportunity to lead an in-depth analysis of student writing trends. Teachers will attend professional development with the and turn-key that information to the targeted PS/IS 102Q staff members. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Incoming Kindergarten students and their parents are invited to attend a workshop to familiarize them with the Instructional Programs, support services, policies and procedures for our school in June of each year. For those students who require ESL screening, parents are invited to an orientation workshop to explain the models of instruction so they can make an informed choice for their children. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers across grades have echoed that ReadyGen and the Wonders literacy program were not effective curriculum in developing student writing capacities as well as phonics learning. As a result, the school shifted back to using TCRWP and Fundations for our ELA programs, and we have partnered with TCRWP to develop staff in ongoing professional learning. The school has been using a dated math curriculum--MyMath--that was ineffective in preparing students for common core standards. After engaging in inquiry work on math performance tasks, our math teachers see the need for a modern math curriculum and we have since moved to using GoMath. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 4 Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 12, 18, 20 5A, 5C, 5D 5E 12, 18, 20 Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 627,292 69,163 24,526 0 7,567,037.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 5   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S./I.S. 102Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S./I.S. 102Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. P.S./I.S. 102 Queens Catherine Weinstein Acting Principal Matthew Borelli Suzanne Sheerin Assistant Principals 9  School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S./I.S. 102Q, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 0  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; 1  ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 90 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: PS/IS 102's Title III after school program will be offered to Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding ELLs in grades kindergarten to two. This program will be held after school. It will be held on Wednesday and Thursday evenings from 2:45p.m to 4:00p.m and will run from November 7th, 2018 until February 14th, 2019. A total of 27 sessions will be held. Three certified ENL teachers will be providing instruction in English to the students attending this after school program. One ENL teacher for each grade will be provided. Each after school program class will consist of approximately ten ELLs. PS/IS 102's Title III before school program will be offered to Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding ELLs in grades three through eight. This program will be held before school. This program will be held on Wednesday and Thursday mornings from 7:00a.m. until 8:00a.m. and will run from March 6th, 2019 until May 30th, 2019. A total of 24 sessions will be held. Six certified ENL teachers will be providing instruction in English to the students attending this Before School program. One certified ENL teacher will be working with 3rd grade students; one certified ENL teachers will be working with 4th grade students; one certified ENL teacher will be working with fifth grade students; one certified ENL teacher will be working with 6th grade students; one certified ENL teacher will be working with 7th grade students; and one certified ENL teacher will be working with 8th grade students. Each morning program class will consist of approximately fifteen ELLs. The Before School Program will specifically address the improvement of literacy skills through English instruction and help students meet the Common Core State standards in English Language Arts. Instruction will focus on literacy using ENL strategies and methodologies. We will focus on improving reading comprehension, vocabulary development and building academic language through read alouds, shared readings and guided readings. The Achieve3000 computer-based program will also be used to assist in the development of comprehension strategies. Additionally, the Lexia computer program will be used with Entering and Emerging students to help improve phonological skills. These programs will assist teachers in addressing the diverse needs of every student through differentiated instruction. These programs will monitor student progress and provide teachers with data that will help them target students’ needs. The Achieve3000 program delivers differentiated instruction for nonfiction reading and writing that's precisely tailored to each student's Lexile reading level. The Lexia program provides all students--from emerging readers to on-level and advanced students-a structured, sequential, scaffolded approach to the six areas of reading instruction--from phonological awareness to comprehension. The after school Program will be delivered by a residency, Puppetry in Practice, under the guidance of certified ENL teachers. Through the use of puppetry and the arts, this after school program aims to promote better speaking, reading, writing and comprehension of the English language. For young ELLs, using a puppet helps students communicate more freely in English 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information with less concern of failure or embarrassment. Additionally, this after school program allows students to develop their language skills while simultaneously expanding other essential social, career and life skills through writing, creating and performing puppet shows, creating storyboards and playbills, and organizing festivals. Each aspect of the project involves a wide range of activities and promotes language. Teachers will use ongoing assessments such as one-on-one conferences, small group instruction, Achieve3000, Lexia data reports and pre and post assessments to gauge students’ progress. Supplemental materials will be provided to augment a variety of instruction. Among those are Options Just Right Reading, Connecting Vocabulary, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, and Finish Line Reading. General instructional supplies, such as notebooks, folders, pencils, chart tablets will be purchased to support the program. Continuing for the 2018-2019 school year will be the implementation of blended learning for our subgroups including ELLs. Using Lexia and Achieve3000 to supplement core Teacher's College Reading and Writing instruction, our ELL students will receive personalized academic supports via the use of iPads and laptops. All records for the Title III program are maintained in the Title III binder, including invitation letters, permission slips, student rosters, and any additional parent notification letters. Every teacher has a folder to record student attendance for every session and these folders are kept in the General Office so the secretaries can keep track of absences. All parent notifications are sent in Spanish and Chinese, which are the two dominant languages in our school. To best meet the needs of our ELLs, we provide home language support by giving students the opportunity to use Achieve3000 and Lexia. Students can access these programs at home for additional support. Spanish speaking students can receive home language support from Achieve3000 which includes articles in Spanish. Lexia also provides support in 5 languages (Spanish, Mandarin, Haitian Creole, Vietnamese, Portuguese, and Arabic) which offers students instructions in their native language. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: P.S./I.S. 102’s Title III professional development program will focus on providing teachers with scaffolding and differentiated instructional strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It will also focus on preparing ELLs to meet and exceed the NYS Common Core Standards in ELA and to achieve higher scores on all state assessments. The teachers that will be receiving professional development are the ENL teachers that are participating in the Title III program. These sessions will be used to help teachers plan for the before school sessions and choose appropriate materials to use with their students. Professional development will be provided for teachers who will be implementing the Achieve3000 and Lexia programs. Teachers will be trained on how the program works and how to use the data provided to drive instruction. The Achieve3000 and Lexia programs are instructional computer-based programs which offer research based lessons based on an initial placement test. These programs will assist teachers in addressing the individual needs of every 6  Part C: Professional Development student through differentiated instruction. It also allows for collaboration among teachers and ensures that all student needs are met. Teachers will also be trained on scaffolding instruction for English Language Learners. These scaffolds will provide instructional support to help make rigorous grade-level curriculum accessible to ELLs. Teachers participating in the professional development workshops will be paid at the per session rate. Two Staff Developers from Lexia, Selma Woldemichael (Professional Learning Facilitator) and Christine Salamone (Implementation Manager) will provide professional development for teachers using this program. Additionally, Robert Marantz, the Achieve3000 Implementation Manager will conduct several professional development sessions for teachers that will be using Achieve3000. Our ENL teachers will be invited to the Teacher's College PD days so that they can scaffold their plan to meet the needs of their students, maintaining the integrity of the program as they go.Topics that will be addressed during these professional development sessions are as follows:1) Content learning of the programs we will be using, including Lexia and Achieve3000 2) The systems for tracking growth and analyzing data for individual students as they progress through the programs Lexia Professional Development Schedule (Tentative): · · · · Achieve3000 Professional Development Schedule (Tentative): · · · September 24, 2018- 2:30PM- 4:00PM January 14, 2019- 2:30PM- 4:00PM March 18, 2019- 2:30PM- 4:00PM June 10, 2019- 2:30PM- 4:00PM October&nbsp;15, 2018- 2:30PM- 4:00PM February&nbsp;4, 2019- 2:30PM- 4:00PM April 8, 2019- 2:30PM- 4:00PM&nbsp; rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: P.S./I.S. 102’s Title III program will provide parents of ELLs with the opportunity to attend workshop(s), so that they can better assist in the education and learning of their child at home. We plan to offer a minimum of three workshops throughout the year. All workshops will be provided by the ENL Department. Topics to be covered include: Lexia, Achieve3000, and the NYSESLAT. One one-and-a-half hour session will be held entitled "Lexia Family Support" This workshop will help to empower parents with strategies to help their children be successful in using the Lexia program at home Parents will receive a pamphlet with troubleshooting questions and 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities answers, as well as other important information to allow for successful home usage of the program. One one-and-a-half hour session will be held entitled "Achieve3000 Family Support." This workshop will help to provide parents with an overview of the program as well as provide them with strategies to help their children be successful in using the program at home. Parents will receive a pamphlet with troubleshooting questions and answers, as well as other important information to allow for successful home usage of the program. This workshop will be held on December 3, 2016 from 2:30PM to 4:00PM. One one-hour session will be held entitled “Preparing ELLs for the NYSESLAT” (time and date to be announced to accommodate different schedules). This workshop is usually offered in March, before NYSESLAT testing begins. Parents attending the workshop will become familiar with the NYSESLAT assessment. They will receive an individual profile of their child’s NYSESLAT scores from the previous year and sample questions from the NYSESLAT. They will also take home a packet of reading and writing selections for practice, as well as ideas to develop language. This session will be held on March 4, 2019 from 2:45pm to 3:45pm. Parents will receive an invitation informing them about the workshops. The invitation is sent out in English, as well as in Chinese and Spanish, the two dominant languages in our school. Five fully certified ENL teachers will facilitate these workshops. General supplies such as folders, photocopy paper, notepads, pencils and books will be purchased to support the parent workshops. Refreshments will be offered as well. Translation will be provided at all parent workshops in the two dominant languages of our school's population, Spanish and Chinese. One of the ENL teachers will provide full oral translation for Spanish speaking parents and one of our Mandarin speaking teachers will provide translation for our Chinese speaking parents. The ENL teachers will provide parents with an agenda for each session and a sign-in sheet to keep track of the attendance. Copies of agendas and sign-in sheets will be kept on file in the Title III binder. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 8 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name P.S./I.S. 102 Bayview Borough Queens School Number 102 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal William Ko Coach Jessica Beltran ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Thiri Soe Teacher/Subject Area Hua Gao Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Suzanne Sheerin Coach School Counselor Parent Jodi Tien Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1331 0 Total number of ELLs 187 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.05%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS/IS 102, teachers use variety of assessments to guide instructional planning for ELLs. Teachers use Fountas and Pinnell running records, Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project pre and post bechmark assessments, teacher-created assessments such as sight word assesments and letter-sound identification assessments. In addition, teachers also use Lexia assessment to drive instruction. Data on the Fountas and Pinnell assessments indicate that students need extensive vocabulary development in order to comprehend the texts they read. As a result, to build students' vocabulary, we have been previewing vocabulary before reading and reviewing vocabulary in different contexts after reading. In addition, we make sure to expose students to vocabulary across content areas. For example, the concept of comparing and contrasting is relevant in different subject areas. When students learn how to compare and contrast characters in reading and writing, they can also take that concept and apply it in science when they compare and contrast leaves in various seasons. Moreover, in math, students take the same 1  concept to compare and contrast shapes or numbers. When applying concepts in various subject areas, students have a more concrete understanding of a certain concept/vocabulary words. The data on the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project pre and post bechmark assessments indicates that our students need additional support in thinking critically about and beyond the texts they read. Before having students think critically about the texts they read, we make sure that they already have a basic comprehension of the text. Then we scaffold students' critical thinking with guiding questions to lead them to think about beyond what is in the text. With questioning, we begin with the first two levels in Bloom's Taxonomy (knowledge and comprehension) and then slowly elevate the complexity of questions (analysis). 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Various structures are in placed to support this effort. For Fountas and Pinnell assessement, teachers are provided with a year-long assessment calendar which indicate the timeframe that the (3 minimum) assessment need to be administered. Once teachers have completed the Fountas and Pinnell assessment for the entire class, they must enter the data into a Google Doc form that is shared with the Literacy Coach and the administration. Teachers also administer pre and post benchmark assessments for every unit. Teachers meet as a grade to analyze the data gathered from the pre and post assessments and modify their instruction accordingly. Additionally, Lexia Program assesses students on a regular basis and inform teachers of student progress, and is a routinized practice during center time. Students with the lowest proficiency are enrolled into a morning/after-school high impact small group learning program, grouped only with students at the same F+P level. Teachers are emailed reports containing individual and class data that they can analyze and use to target students' needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At PS/IS 102, teachers are required to administer both baseline and benchmark assessments for every unit. Teachers use Teachers' College Reading and Writing Project baseline and benchmark assessments to measure progress and areas of need. According to the baseline assessments, it is indicated that our students need an extensive vocabulary development and thinking critically about and beyond the texts. To address these needs, teachers use different research-based strategies. For example, to build students' vocabulary, we have been previewing vocabulary before reading and reviewing vocabulary in different contexts after reading. In addition, we make sure to expose students to vocabulary across content areas. To support their critical thinking, we scaffold them with guiding questions to lead them to think about beyond what is in the text. With questioning, we begin with the first two levels in Bloom's Taxonomy (knowledge and comprehension) and then slowly elevate the complexity of questions (analysis). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data (Fountas & Pinnell, end-of-unit assessments) has been gathered, classroom teachers analyze the data by using grade level standards and identify students that are far below the standards. The students are then brought to the attention of the Assistant Principal who then discusses the students with the RTI and ENL teachers. The intervention structure we use is referred to as Personalized Learning (PL). Checkpoints throughout the school year (after major units, F+P round, etc.) ensure that we flag the students who are falling behind, and enabling our responsive to support them. 2  As a Team, the PL Team decides on the implementation of the strategies and make a schedule for the RTI teachers to service the identified students. The RTI teachers then evaluate the students' growth every 6 weeks and determine whether or not the students can be graduated from the Program. Should the student not have made significant gains after the six-week cycle, they will be enrolled in a am/pm high-impact literacy program for 10 sessions. All students have at least one period per week a TechFlex intervention time. Two teachers are scheduled during this time to provide targeted support for all students. A typical session would have 10 students working in a small group with one teacher, and the other teacher guiding 10 other students for individual work. The remaining 10 students will engage in independent reading or fulfill their weekly blended learning requirements. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In order to provide the appropriate instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention framework, our school looks at the students' home language, cultural and family background. This gives us insight to the student's literacy and social development and the skills they need to work on. For example, if a Mandarin-speaking student received interrupted formal education in his/her native country, we would focus on building his/her (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills) BICS first, then slowly we would transition to developing the Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). Such instruction would be done in a small group setting or one-to-one to provide the necessary skills that they need to acquire BICS and CALP. We follow the RTI Model to take the 4 steps in making sure we address the needs of ELLs. Initially, we would assess students to determine whether they are meeting grade-level standards at the appropriate rate. Students are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell (reading levels), letter-sound assessments (phonemic awareness) as well as end-of-unit assessments. Following the initial screening and assessment, we would provide ELLs with Tier 1 instruction such as previewing concepts and key vocabulary, including multicultural literature and activities to engage students and having students participate in Total Physical Response (TPR) to fully internalize new academic vocabulary. For students who require more intensive instruction, Tier 2 and 3 interventions would be provided in a smaller group setting or one-to-one, respectively by our AIS/RTI teachers. Lastly, we would monitor students' progress to analyze how they are responding to the various interventions and make modifications as necessary. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. From the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT, the following data was revealed: Out of the 193 NYSESLAT test takers, 45 students (23.3%) scored at the Commanding level, 45 students (23.3%) advanced 1 proficiency level, 12 students (6.2%) advanced 2 proficiency levels, 1 student (0.5%) advanced 3 proficiency levels, 1 student (0.5%) advanced 4 proficiency levels and 53 students (27.4%) remained at the same proficiency level. From the Spring 2017 ELA and Math exams, the following data was revealed: 9 students (4.8%) scored at or below 25th growth percentile and scored at level 1 or 2 on ELA and 4 students (2.2%) scored at or below 25th growth percentile and scored at level 1 or 2 on Math. 3  According to the NYSESLAT data, we’ve noticed that the majority of our ELLs stayed at the same level or made only 1 proficiency level. When evaluated our ENL program (Integrated and Standalone), we noticed the need for a lot of home language support for those students. Therefore, we have opened up a Dual Language program starting the 2017-2018 school year. Our goal is to provide English Language Learners with instruction in their home language and English with the goal of developing proficiency in both. According to the ELA and Math data, we’ve noticed that 13 ELLs scored at the level 1 or 2 on the ELA and Math. We have implemented a Morning Program for them to strengthen their literacy and math skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? According to the NYSESLAT data, we’ve noticed that the majority of our ELLs stayed at the same level or made only 1 proficiency level. When evaluated our ENL program (Integrated and Standalone), we noticed the need for a lot of home language support for those students. Therefore, we have opened up a Dual Language program starting the 2017-2018 school year. Our goal is to provide English Language Learners with instruction in their home language and English with the goal of developing proficiency in both. According to the ELA and Math data, we’ve noticed that 13 ELLs scored at the level 1 or 2 on the ELA and Math. We have implemented a Morning Program for them to strengthen their literacy and math skills. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We currently have five certified ENL teachers servicing the ELL population in our school. We use both the Standalone and Integrated models to service these students. We refer to the new CR Part 154 requirements for English Language Learners (ELLs) to assure that our ELLs are receiving the mandated units of both standalone and integrated ENL. When teachers use the Integrated model, they are providing the mandated ENL minutes during ELA or other content areas, depending on the students’ level of proficiency within that class. ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to provide differentiated instruction to support the ELLs in ELA and other content areas. The overall goal is to incorporate ENL strategic instruction and methodologies in every lesson. When teachers use the Standalone model, they are working with students in small groups, based on proficiency levels and providing standalone units to that group. When we provide stand alone ENL to our students, we reinforce the skills that they are learning in class and provide them additional support in areas of their language needs. At the end of every school year, administrators, classroom teachers and ENL teachers collaborate to reorganize the ENL population into classes for the upcoming school year. Students are grouped based on their English proficiency level in order to meet the mandated number of instructional minutes. Many classes with a large number of ELLs are homogeneously grouped (for example, former ELLs were all placed in the same class on each grade). This helps teachers target specific needs of and maximize instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. ELLs in our Dual Language program receive at least 180 minutes of Home Language Arts per week. Reading/Writing and content areas (math, social studies) are provided in both Mandarin and English. They also receive mandated ENL minutes according to their proficiency levels. Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week, 4  Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes per week and Commanding students receive 90 minutes per week. ENL students in Dual Language program are grouped homogeneously in order to provide level-appropriate instruction. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school refers to the new CR Part 154 requirements in order to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided to all ELLs. In the Freestanding ENL Program, Entering students receive a total of 360 ENL minutes per week, 180 of which are standalone ENL and 180 are integrated ENL/ELA. Our Emerging students also receive 360 ENL minutes a week. They receive a minimum of 90 minutes of standalone ENL and a minimum of 180 minutes of ENL/ELA. The remaining 90 minutes can be utilized by either providing additional standalone or ENL (with ELA or any other content area) support. Our Transitioning and Expanding students receive a total of 180 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Transitioning students receive a minimum of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and the other 90 minutes can be used by either providing standalone ENL or ENL (with ELA or any other content area) support. Expanding students receive all 180 minutes as integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Under the new regulations, former ELLs are also entitled to receive ENL support for two years. Therefore, our Commanding students receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction a week. They receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. The ENL teachers customize their programs and schedules based on their students’ proficiency levels to ensure that the mandated minutes are met. In our Dual Language Program, ELLs receive at least 180 minutes of Home Language Arts per week. Reading/Writing and content areas (math, social studies) are provided in both Mandarin and English. They also receive mandated ENL minutes according to their proficiency levels as mentioned above. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. We have adapted our curriculum to meet the demands of the Common Core State Standards. Our school uses Teachers College Reading and Writing Project in the grades K-5 and Code-X in the grades 6-8. When an ENL teacher co-teaches during ELA integrated period, he/she delivers instruction in English and uses a variety of resources to make content comprehensible. The teacher makes the objective clear to the students and the concepts taught are age appropriate. When planning lessons, teachers also take into consideration the students' L1 literacy, second language proficiency, and the reading level of the materials. ENL teachers also build on the students’ prior knowledge and introduce new vocabulary in context. In the content areas, teachers also develop the students’ academic language through read alouds. They focus on those Tier 2 words that are often difficult for ELLs. Teachers choose a “juicy” sentence and unpack the language of that sentence together with the students (Sentence Acrobatics). Teachers use several strategies such as shades of meaning, sentence deconstruction, TPR, “talk it out” or “draw it out” to make language meaningful for students. To make content comprehensible, teachers use additional materials such as charts, graphs, pictures, illustrations, realia, math manipulatives, videos, computers and demonstrations. The activities that teachers incorporate include lesson concepts as well as opportunities for ELLs to practice the English language within the four modalities. Students are also given content area glossaries in Social Studies, Math and Science in their native languages. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our ELL students are appropriately evaluated in their home language through the Spanish LAB as well when they take the Math and Science state tests in grades three and up. ELLs who choose to, can take the test in their home language, rather than in English. Their responses are then translated by a staff member who speaks the same home language. Once translated, the responses are evaluated and scored. We also provide glossaries/bilingual dictionaries as instructional supports during the school day and if necessary for their 5  use on informal/formal assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a.Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) require special attention in order for them to succeed in our educational system. Instructional approaches used to reach SIFEs will vary depending on factors such as home language and the level of home language literacy skills. We differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups in many ways. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) are placed in the most appropriate classrooms based upon their academic level, age, and English proficiency level. For example, a SIFE in third grade may need instruction in order to develop literacy skills that his or her peers received in earlier grades. Additionally, a SIFE will receive the opportunity to practice these skills in an age appropriate environment. SIFEs will also be grouped together with peers in order to provide motivation, support, and language acquisition opportunities. Each individual case is treated with care, and we offer as many additional services as possible to the student to help bridge the academic gap in their education. These students will receive the mandated number of minutes per week of ENL instruction based on their proficiency level and in accordance with NYS CR Part 154. We will also provide additional interventions during the school day based on the student’s individual needs. We will also offer the student an opportunity to attend our ENL Early Morning or our After School Program. Additionally, SIFE students will receive emotional support from the guidance department. b. ELLs in U. S. schools less than three years are placed in classrooms based on their proficiency levels in order to make sure that they are properly serviced. These newcomers receive the mandated number of minutes per week of ENL instruction based on their proficiency level and in accordance with NYS CR Part 154. Since many newcomers arrive with little to no English in any of the four language skill areas and often with little to no literacy skills in their native language, our newcomers will receive ENL services that are intended to provide both content area and second language instruction. The intent is to develop both Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) and Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). Literacy and language development will take place through student participation in the reading and writing workshops in their classrooms as well as further more specialized instruction from their ENL teacher. ENL teachers will work to make content area and language instruction more accessible to students by employing sheltered English content instruction as well as scaffolding techniques. Teachers will meet individual student needs through conferring and small and strategy group lessons. In addition to these supports, newcomers should also receive extra attention through after-school programs and additional academic intervention. c. Our 4-6 year ELLs receive the mandated number of minutes per week of ENL instruction based on their proficiency level and in accordance with NYS CR Part 154. We continue to provide instruction for this subgroup based on their proficiency level and NYSESLAT modalities. Students are grouped based on their needs and small group instruction is provided to help students become proficient in all four modalities. During small group instruction, teachers use the Comprehension Strategies Kit to reinforce key skills and strategies and build academic language using both fiction and nonfiction texts. Developing students are also invited to attend the ENL Early Morning Program where they will receive 60 minutes of instruction once a week. To provide the best support for them, we organize curricula around themes to facilitate students' content knowledge and academic vocabulary. We also scaffold the content knowledge to make it more accessible to students. In addition, we will incorporate students' backgrounds, cultures, native languages and experiences into our lessons. We would constantly build students' confidence in being able to learn a new language (English) in order to keep them motivated and engaged so that they 6  can be academically successful. d. We service our long-term ELLs under the belief that each student progresses at his or her own rate through the language acquisition process. Furthermore, we believe any group of learners will be made up of students who are at different stages in their language acquisition and cognitive development. Following the natural order of language acquisition presented by theorists, many students will develop BICS first and CALPS second. Accordingly, our primary focus for long-term ELLs is to develop CALPS so that students can achieve mastery of reading, writing, speaking and listening skills for application in academic content areas. In order to provide them with the extra instruction necessary for success, long-term ELLs also receive instruction in after-school programs and in some cases individualized intervention plans. e. As for former ELLs who are in years 1 or 2 after testing proficient, we help make their transition out of ENL as smooth as possible. We provide these students with the mandated number of ENL minutes per week according to the CR Part 154. These students receive 90 minutes of small group instruction by an ENL teacher to strengthen literacy skills across the content areas. All ELLs and former ELLs for up to two years after testing out are eligible for ELL testing accommodations, in addition to any accommodations on their IEPs or 504 Plans, if applicable. The ENL Department alongside the Testing Coordinator determines which accommodations are most suitable and beneficial for each ELL. ELLs are entitled to using these accommodations for most assessments, including those that are teacher-made and State-mandated. ELLs do not receive testing accommodations on the NYSESLAT. Our school provides testing accommodations to ELLs, as needed, on all NYS ELA and content area assessments (mathematics, science and social studies). We make all necessary arrangements to make these accommodations available for ELLs who need them. In addition to testing accommodations, ELLs may use bilingual glossaries when taking State examinations in all subjects except languages other than English exams (LOTE). These glossaries are given to the student in their preferred language. Additionally, for state examinations for which SED provides written translations, ELLs may use both English and an alternative language edition of the test simultaneously. Oral translations for low incidence languages are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. If necessary, we will provide ELL students with an oral translation of a state examination when there is no translated edition provided by SED. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At P.S/I.S 102, we have ELL students who are designated as Students With Disabilities. This population receives individualized instruction from their classroom teacher, paraprofessionals, and the ENL provider as prescribed by their Individualized Educational Program (IEP). Collaboration between teachers is essential to ensuring congruence and focused planning. We incorporate a variety of strategies, while using grade-level materials to accelerate English language development and make academic content more accessible for our ELLs-SWDs. Teachers of ELLs-SWDs in grades K-5 use the TC instructional program for reading and writing. This program uses a variety of fiction and non-fiction selections and is based upon the Common Core State Standards. Tier II and Tier III vocabulary is taught in this program so that students can understand content and increase their academic language bank simultaneously. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers of ELL-SWDs use many ENL strategies such as teaching vocabulary through Shades of Meaning, using TPR, building background knowledge, using thinking maps, deconstructing sentences and incorporating a lot of visual supports. These strategies help to scaffold the content and increase students' English reading and writing skills. In grades 6-8, The Code X program is used and also include additional adaptations for each lesson that can be used to differentiate instruction for ELLs-SWDs. 7  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school strives to support ELL-SWDs in achieving their IEP goals and attaining English proficiency within the least restrictive environment. We always strive to place our ELL-SWDs in the most age and grade appropriate environment where they can flourish and meet their individual goals. Teachers scaffold lessons through differentiation in order to meet the specific learning needs of the students. ENL teachers typically use the Integrated model for these classes in order to keep instruction seamless and maintain student focus. ENL teachers collaborate with the classroom teachers to keep instruction consistent and geared towards individual students' needs. All the teachers (general ed, special ed, ENL) and service providers work together as a team to achieve the IEP goals and attain English proficiency. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The Response to Intervention Team at P.S./I.S. 102Q has been very proactive in identifying students in need of academic intervention services based on teacher recommendations, criterion referenced assessments, and standardized test scores. Once identified, the team formulates an intervention plan and determines what additional services the students need. During ELA, teachers may provide additional support for ELLs by using the Sundance Comprehension Strategies Kits for both fiction and nonfiction. Teachers can use these kits during small groups to provide targeted instruction to students with similar needs. Within the Go Math program, teachers scaffold instruction for ELLs and use hands on activities to support instruction. In other content areas such as Science and Social Studies, teachers may provide ELLs with bilingual dictionaries to help them understand content specific vocabulary. They also support instruction by bringing in supplemental materials such as, video clips, pictures, realia and other resources that help make content comprehensible to ELLs. In Science, teachers may also use the SRA Science Photo Library Kit which includes a photograph and translations of the word in over ten languages. In our Extended Day Title III program, we offer additional support to Newcomers and Developing ELLs in ELA and Math. Students are selected based on state test results, teacher recommendations, report card grades and other assessments. In addition, After School Programs are offered throughout the year in ELA, Science and Math. All programs are taught in English and are implemented using ENL methodologies. Native language may be used in all content areas by offering students bilingual dictionaries and using the photo cards. Data is gathered through informal assessments in Science, Social Studies and Math. Item analysis reports for both Math and ELA are also used to gather data on specific skills. In addition, students use Lexia, Khan Academy, and Mathletics programs to practice their reading, writing and math skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? According to the NYSESLAT data, we’ve noticed that the majority of our ELLs stayed at the same level or made only 1 proficiency level. When evaluated our ENL program (Integrated and Standalone), we noticed the need for a lot of home language support for those students. Therefore, we have opened up a Dual Language program starting the 2017-2018 school year. Our goal is to provide English Language Learners with instruction in their home language and English with the goal of developing proficiency in both. According to the ELA and Math data, we’ve noticed that 13 ELLs scored at the level 1 or 2 on the ELA and Math. We have implemented a Morning Program for them to strengthen their literacy and math skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered equal access to all school programs during the school day and after school. The key to equal access begins with equal access to curriculum. ENL students often receive excessive supports in a finite school day, and thereby missing key elements of classroom learning. We plan ENL supports as a component of our gen ed instruction, and the focus of the learning, no matter how it is differentiated, is always aligned with one another no matter the type of support. ELLs are invited to attend curricular programs such as the Early Morning Program and the After School Programs, which assist students in achieving grade level performance. ELLs are also invited to participate in clubs such as, chorus, art, band, cheerleading, basketball and horticulture. They are additionally invited to participate in extracurricular activities such as 8  Dance, Theater and Plays, Robotics, Soccer Team, Basketball Team, Cheerleading Team, Young Runner Club, that are offered as an enrichment program. Prior to the onset of the programs, letters are sent out to parents of all students, including ELLs, explaining the programs and asking for permission to attend. Once parent permission is received students begin participation until the conclusion of the program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The school provides teachers with various instructional materials to support ELLs. In the lower grades, Leap Frog, big books, leveled Guided Reading sets, picture dictionaries, First Thousand Words CD-Rom, Photo Library and Jazz Chants are some of the resources that are available to teachers. In the upper grades, National Geographic guided reading sets, Comprehension Matters skills sets, Recipe for Reading, Connecting Vocabulary, are available to teachers. In addition, sets of content related books in the areas of Social Studies and Science are available for teachers to use during small group instruction. Students are encouraged to use home language glossaries in the content areas. The use of technology is encouraged through websites such as Lexia, Achieve 3000, Khan Academy and Mathletics. In addition, Entering students use the website Starfall and ABCMouse to help them acquire basic vocabulary and develop English language. Our school has invested heavily in technology including laptop and tablet carts that the teacher can sign out for student use. Additionally, Lexia offers online support for at home and school use by students. To support students in their home language, bilingual dictionaries are offered to students in their preferred language. Teachers also give students access to SRA Photo Library kits, which translates vocabulary in over ten languages. In grades K-5, a period a week is designated for students to go on Lexia and/or Mathletics to practice their literacy and math skills. In grades 6-8, a period a week is given to students to go on Achieve 3000 and/or Khan Academy to practice their literacy and math skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our Freedstanding ENL program we promote the use of the students’ home language where it is helpful. We encourage students to transfer their Home Language skills whenever possible through the use of glossaries and library books. We ask students to use their Home Language to help newly admitted students when necessary. We often place students with little or no English in partnerships or triads that include a student who speaks the same Home Language. In this way the new student can still engage in partner conversations. We also give students the opportunity to write in their Home Language if they have not yet acquired the skills needed to write in English. A staff member will then translate the student’s writing into English. To provide additional support in the Home Language, students are provided with glossaries containing words related to the content areas. In our Dual Language program, Social and academic language proficiency in Chinese is assessed on a regular basis. All aspects of language proficiency, listening, speaking, reading, and writing, are assessed through summative and on-going assessments, such as exams, writing projects, individual interviews, and teacher observations. When delivering instruction, the teacher uses the sheltered instruction model to integrate content and language. Each lesson includes content goals as well as language goals. In addition, students make connections between what they have learned in two languages through the preview-review model. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL program supports students using developmentally appropriate texts and materials that also correspond to the age and grade level of the students. PS/IS 102 understands that developmentally appropriate curriculum should challenge students, but not overwhelm them. A curriculum that is at the right level is work a student can do with scaffolding and support from a teacher at the beginning and eventually achieve mastery of independently. Therefore we use The Teachers College Reading and Writing Project and Code X programs which are Common Core approved non-fiction and fiction texts. Low level/high interest books are also available for student use during independent reading. Read alouds are chosen based on grade level appropriate texts from the Common Core library. Teachers adapt resources that are used for ELLs-SWDs by selecting texts and materials that correspond to their ages and grades, while being appropriate to their cognitive needs. The texts selected are within the unit of study and/or content that the students are focusing on. Additionally, in order for us to be successful at making curriculum choices that are developmentally appropriate for our students, we need to have a solid understanding of the continuum of development for children in our school. For example, a first-grade teacher can expect her students to be within a specific range of reading and writing development, somewhere 9  along a spectrum of the emergent level. Furthermore, we also take individual needs of students into consideration when making the curriculum age and grade level appropriate. We achieve this by being close observers of our students. By recognizing where our students are in development in relation to the expected continuum, we can provide extra support if necessary. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Currently, PS/IS 102 does not share the building with any other school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the beginning of the school year, we offer a parent open house for all the newly enrolled ELLs to inform parents about what their child will be learning and how the school day will be structured throughout the year. During the open house, we also provide parents with resources (translation unit, homework help, library information, etc) so that parents are aware of all the help and resources available to them. Moreover, our Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors are always available to answer any questions that they have and/or to provide emotional support in transitioning to the new country. In addition, we are currently in the process of compiling a newcomers' packet with key vocabulary and phrases in English and in their home language, home activities, a map of the school, bilingual books for parents to read to their children and how to seek outside resources to support their child's learning. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, we offer Spanish as a language elective class. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. We use the self-contained model with alternative days schedule. Each week, two and half days are taught in English and two and half days in Chinese. EPs and ELLs are integrated 100% of the day. b. Reading, writing, math, social studies are taught 50% in English and 50% in Chinese. c. Only one language is used during the instruction. There is no spontaneous code-switching. d. Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously in both English and Chinese. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All ELL personnel are considered in our school's Professional Learning Plan. This plan addresses our design and structure of the Monday 80-minute professional development sessions. ENL teachers receive PD on a variety of ELL-related topics throughout the year, based on their needs. Topics include, but are 0  not limited to: administering and scoring the NYSESLAT, interpreting NYSESLAT scores, and using NYSESLAT scores to place students, identify levels of service and provide instructional support to students. Further, ELL personnel are invited to meet with classroom teachers during grade-level team meetings and Monday PD sessions to learn about each team's instructional goals related to Common Core standards. They also engage in planning to ensure all students, including ELLs, have access to the curriculum. Further, several of our ENL teachers will be attending workshops at Teachers' College on ELL-related topics: 1) Developing a Toolkit of Methods to Support English Language Learners in Becoming Stronger Readers & Writers - November 7, 2017 2) Ramping Up Shared Reading, Shared Writing & Interactive Writing to Support Grammar and Writing Conventions for English Language Learners - November 28, 2017 They will turnkey information learned to their colleagues during team meetings and Monday PD sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers receive at least 15% of PD hours focused on ELL-specific professional development. Most of these hours occur during grade-level teacher team meetings and, occasionally, during whole staff Monday PD sessions. ENL personnel facilitate these sessions and topics include: interpreting NYSESLAT scores, understanding ELL programs, integrating language and content instruction, and teaching strategies & tools to support ENL students in the classroom. All facilitators keep agendas and attendance logs for their records. Bilingual/ENL teachers also receive ELL-specific professional development during Monday PD sessions and through off-site PD opportunities offered by the NYCDOE Department of English Language Learners (DELLs) and through our contract with Teachers College. Participants attending PD offsite maintain agendas from all workshops and turnkey information presented to colleagues upon returning to school. Agendas and attendance logs are maintained at in-house PD offerings. Our ENL Coordinator works with administrators to ensure 15%/50% PD hours are met for the year. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? According to the new CR Part 154, ENL teachers at PS/IS 102 individually meets with the parents or guardians of English Language Learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, and quarterly progress meetings. Each ENL teacher creates a schedule for the year to hold an annual conference with parents of the students they service. They will notify parents about this meeting with a formal letter in the parents' preferred language. These meetings will be conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. At this meeting, teachers will inform parents about the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Additionally, they will be provided with the New York State Education Department's Parents' Backpack Guide to the Common Core State Standards and the Parents' Bill of Rights for New York State English Language Learners. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 1  We make parent involvement a big priority at our school. In order to develop a welcoming environment and encourage parent participation, the school invites parents to various activities throughout the year; such as Meet the Teacher, The 100th Day of School, school concerts/plays, field trips, workshops and many more. For parents of ELLs, the school conducts parent workshops with the assistance of the Parent Coordinator. The ELL parent workshops focus on orienting the parents to the school system and explaining program options, standards, curriculum, assessments, student expectations, general program requirements and how parents can help their children at home. Workshops on familiarizing parents with the ELA and NYSESLAT are also given during the year. By attending these workshops, parents become more aware of the format of these assessments. They are given suggestions on how they can help prepare their child for these tests at home. Additionally, the Parent Coordinator offers many workshops throughout the year for all parents, including parents of ELLs. These workshops are offered on a monthly basis in varying topics that are geared to educate and promote community involvement. Sample topics include: How to keeps your child healthy, How to be an effective parent, Citizenship and Immigration, How to involve your child with reading, bullying, healthy eating, how to manage behavior challenges, depression management, domestic violence. All workshops are filled with resources and activities that help parents become familiar with these topics. For example, the nutrition and parenting classes are interactive with recipes, videos and hands-on activities. Another example of a workshop given is on how to involve your child in reading. This is a hand’s on workshop with books that are given to parents and effective reading strategies are modeled. For most of these workshops, parents receive an acknowledgement certificate for their attendance and participation. The Parent Coordinator interprets the information given during these activities for Spanish speaking parents. If a staff member who speaks a language other than Spanish is available during the time of the parent activity, then he/she may also attend. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, William Ko, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: 102 School DBN: 24Q102 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) William Ko Title Principal Suzanne Sheerin Assistant Principal Thiri Soe Jodi Tien Hua Gao Jessica Beltran Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q102 School Name: Superintendent: Madelene Chan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home language percentage breakdown per our RHLA report: English 38% Chinese 25% Spanish 22% Philipino (Tagalog) 3% Bengali 2% 5  Urdu 1% Hindi 1% Nepali 1% Burmese 1% Tibetan 1% Indonesian 1% A new initiative to support our 2015-2016 CEP goal to improve parent outreach, we are in development of a questionnaire to survey all families on their needs and preferences on a range of school-related topics. Information regarding their language preferences will be used in conjunction with ATS data to improve communication between school and all families. This survey will be conducted no later than December 2015. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language English 38% Chinese 25% Spanish 22% Philipino (Tagalog) 3% Bengali 2% Urdu 1% Hindi 1% Nepali 1% Burmese 1% Tibetan 1% Indonesian 1% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 6  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Before and After School ENL programs for students are translated in both Chinese and Spanish. As we institute more Academic and Extra Cirricular program we will also translate that information. These are programs that occur fluidly throughout the school year. Many begin in late October and run through May. Information pertaining to IEPS, re-evaluation or tri-annual meeting for students with disablities will be translated. In March, we will send out information regarding the NY State ELA and Math exam. We also dessimeninate information gathered at the monthly Parent Association meeting in Chinese and will make them available in Spanish for upcoming meetings. I 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? In September, the ENL department holds a meeting for ALL newly admitted ENL students. At the meeting, we use school based Chinese and Spanish translators. We make use of school based translators ( teachers, paraprofessionals, school aides, parent coordiantor, aprent association) for informal, daily meetings, as well as for Tuesday parent engagement time. For 7  formal events, such as parent-teacher conferences, we use the TIU. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will request translation services from TIU for critical comunications to families in their language. All parents will also receive a memo detailing how they can receive free translation services in addition to the DOE-generated documents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A parent survey will be sent home in December and parents are encouraged to provide feedback anytime on our school website. http://ps102q.org/feedback/ 8 
