 25Q107 School Name: P.S. 107 THOMAS A DOOLEY Principal: LORI CUMMINGS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 107Q- Thomas Dooley School 342500010107 Pre-K - 5 School Number (DBN): 25Q107 167-02 45 th Avenue Flushing NY 11358 718 762 5995 718 761 4989 Phone Number: Fax: Lori Cummings Lcummings2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Lori Cummings Cara Jacofsky Elaine Evangelou Carol Ring Anastasia Skiadas N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 25 Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: DDiMango@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 281 7605 Phone Number: 718 281 7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: QPN Executive Director’s Office Address: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lori Cummings Cara Jacofsky Elaine Evangelou Anastasia Skiadas Sara Cangelosi Carol Ring Diana Turck *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA Member/ UFT Member/ UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anna Prudente Susan DeLuca Vania Jimenez Elisa MrKulic EmalynSantiago MariaPapageorge-Ntouvas George Tselios Member/UFT Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 107 is dedicated to developing the whole child. It is our mission to provide our students with an educational experience that fosters academic, social, and emotional growth. We believe it is our responsibility to establish a solid foundation that will pave the way for college and career readiness. We are committed to the instruction of the core subjects in addition to providing experiences that will develop readiness skills and traits. Through arts and enrichment activities our students gain life skills/qualities such as commitment, perseverance, and collaboration that we believe are critical for achievement.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 107 is a diverse learning community. Approximately 53% of the student population is Asian, 33% Hispanic, and 14% Caucasian. In addition to diversity in cultures and backgrounds, PS 107 is composed of a wide range of learners with varied instructional needs. 14% of the student population are students with special needs and 25% of the students are English language learners. To support the success of all students, a variety of services are provided. Services offered at PS 107 include, multiple Special Education Services (Integrated Co-Teaching, Special Education Teacher Support Services, Self-contained, and Academic Career and Essential Skills programs) and English as a New Language Services. Additionally, transitional bilingual Mandarin programs and Spanish Dual Language programs are offered. To accomplish the mission of developing the whole child and setting a strong foundation, PS 107 established the following partnerships and initiatives: Arts Grants & Residencies:  Dance & Musical Theater Residencies with Together in Dance  Puppetry Residency and Music and Movement Residencies affiliated with Materials for the Arts  Music and the Brain grant Studio in the School grant   92nd Street Y, Discover Music Program  Parents as Arts Partners grant School Initiatives: ● Student of the Month ● Citizen of the Month ● Go Green Recycling Initiative ● Lunch Leaders – 5th graders volunteer time in the cafeteria to help their younger peers ● Random Acts of Kindness –Bucket Filling through kindness ● Student Government Officers ● Fundraising/Donating for Causes through: Penny Harvest, Denim and Pink Lemonade sale, Valentine’s for Vets, Toy Drive etc. ● Senior and Junior Glee Clubs ● Dance Troupe ● Cheerleading ● Basketball Team ● Theater Club ● Chess Team 0  ● School Assemblies (All classes host and perform 1 assembly) ● Music in the Air 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In 2017-2018, PS 107 added an Academic, Career and Essential Skills (ACES) program for students in grades 3-5. The program is designed to support students with specialized learning needs. The program is focused on providing core learning in conjunction with teaching students essential life skills. In the 2018 - 2019 school year an additional (lower grade) ACES program has been added as well as a kindergarten transitional bilingual Mandarin special class. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on an analysis of the 2018 State Exam Data in relation to the Targets set forth in the 2016-2017 Framework for Great schools, the following statements can be made:  PS 107 exceeded the target percentages set forth for students achieving level 3 and 4 in ELA o PS 107 surpassed the targeted percentage of students at proficiency in ELA by nearly 7%. 2018 Exam data revealed 60.6% of students achieved a level 3 or 4 on the ELA exam. The range set forth to "Meet Target" was 45.5 - 53.9%.  PS 107 exceeded the targeted percentage of students at level 3 and 4 in Mathematics. o The targeted percentage range of students achieving level 3 or 4 was 51.9-61%. 2018 exam data revealed 66.7% of students achieved a level 3 or 4 on the Mathematics exam. This is nearly 6% above the maximum value of the "Meeting Target" percentage. o PS 107 Met and/or Exceeded the targets set forth in both ELA and Math within 5/6 sub-groups named to "Closing the Achievement Gap" The 2017 Framework for Great Schools Measures indicate that PS 107 made gains in the following areas:  Rigorous Instruction (from 2.90- 3.07)  Collaborative Teachers (from 2.66 - 2.83)   Trust (from 2.85 - 3.44) Strong Family & Community Ties (from 2.97-3.58) Areas of continued focus: The Element of Great schools that the school performed lowest in was Effective School Leadership  3 of the 4 sub-categories within this element were scored below 3.0 on the school survey o Teacher influence score 1.86 o Program coherence score 2.83 o Principal instructional leadership score 2.0 The Element of Collaborative Teachers continues to approach target (2.83)  2 of the 4 sub-categories within this element evidence scores below 3.0  Peer Collaboration- score 2.33  Quality of Professional Development- score 1.83 1  The Element of Rigorous Instruction on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide indicates the following:  Common Core Shifts in Mathematics (score 2.75)  Academic Press 74% positive responses by teachers (in comparison to other sections of rigorous instruction having positive responses at 88% and 93%) Based on the analysis of the 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide and additional data sources, PS 107 will focus on the following:  Continuing to make gains in proficiency and growth within both ELA and Mathematics through the development of learning experiences for students that include Standards aligned and require high levels of cognitive demand Strengthening professional development experiences to include teacher influence, peer collaboration, and program coherence with particular attention to the development of activities aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards and Shifts in Mathematics Strengthening instructional leadership and increasing teacher influence by:   Improving the clarity of the school vision and the expectations set forth to achieve the vision o o Participating and facilitating grade and vertical planning o o Increasing teacher influence and voice within professional learning Increasing teacher influence and requiring participation in the development of activities and materials/resources to support instruction 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q107 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 970 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 67 66 48 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 34 9 48 48 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 66.2% % Reduced Lunch 25.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 32.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.09 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 83 84 48 94.6% 10.1% 16.6% 1.2% 55.1% 0.8% 4 12% 10.8 66.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A NO YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1) School Strengths within Rigorous Instruction: 2016-2017 Quality Review identifies:    Indicator 1.2 (Pedagogy) as proficient "The school’s belief that students learn best through targeted, strategy-based conferencing was observed across all classrooms. Teaching strategies include instructional grouping, tiered activities, and strategy charts. " "School leaders' purposeful decisions regarding the curricula have led to building coherence" 2017-2018 NYC School Survey:  An increase in overall score from 2.59 in 2017 to 3.27 in 2018 within the area of Rigorous Instruction 2017-2018 School Quality Guide:  An increase in overall score within rigorous instruction from 2.90 in 2017 to 3.07 in 2018 2017-2018 ADVANCE Dashboard:  83.5% of teacher practice was effective and highly effective within the Domain of Instruction.  Analysis of observation feedback reveal an increase in the number of students responding in discussions The 2017-2018 School Quality Workbook:  Indicates that we have "exceeded" or "met target" in both ELA & Mathematics within 5/6 areas of “Closing the Achievement Gap”. 2018 NYS ELA data:  All grades(3,4,5) reflect an increase in proficiency(2018) from the overall proficiency of the previous year(2017) within the respective grade. 4   Overall proficiency increased from 55.7% to 60.9%.  Proficiency within sub-groups increased from 2017 to 2018:  Current ELLs: from 9.7% in 2017 to 26.9% in 2018  Hispanic Students: from 44.9% in 2017 to 50% in 2018  All grades (3,4,5) evidence an increase by at least 3% in the average total possible points within "Writing to Sources"  All grades (3,4,5) show an equal or a greater average percent of total possible points in "Writing to Sources" as compared to the "All Reading" average possible points within multiple choice questions. 2018 NYS Math data:  All grades (3,4,5) reflect an increase in proficiency (2018) from the overall proficiency of the previous year (2017) within the respective grade.  Overall proficiency increased from 59% in 2017 to 66.8% proficiency in 2018 2) School Priority Needs: 2016-2017 QR indicated the following:  "Although teachers meet regularly to look at student work, their work is ineffectively connected to the implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards, and the instructional shifts. The work of teacher teams resulting in progress for groups of students including English Language Learners is not in evidence" 2018 Advance data revealed:  Component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning was the lowest rated component within Domain 3 (Instruction) with effective-highly effective practice at 76.86%. This is therefore an area for continued growth. Observation reviews revealed engagement needs with specifications to the depth of the task that students are engaging in. 2017-2018 NYC School Survey indicates:  71% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes respond to challenging test questions.  63% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes respond to challenging questions in class. 2018 NYS Mathematics Exam data:  Overall percentage of students performing at level 1 evidences little movement, (2018)14.8% level 1, (20170 16% level 1, (2016) 17% level 1.  Movement of the same cohort of students evidences little to no shift in students achieving at a level 1 .     The overall proficiency of Hispanic Students reflects a stall in growth. In 2017 33.3% of Hispanic students In 2016 21.05% of 3rd grade students achieved level 1 In 2017 17.9% of 4th grade students achieved level 1 In 2018 18% of 5th grade students achieved level 1  evidenced proficiency, in 2018 33.6% of Hispanic students evidenced proficiency. For all grades, the average percent of possible points within the "Constructed Responses" in Mathematics was lower than the average possible points in Mathematics. In grades 3 & 4 Constructed Responses were 8% lower than multiple choice questions. In grade 5, the average possible points was 28.8% lower than that of multiple choice. 5  In grades 3 and 4, multiple choice items that addressed multi-step word problems and problem solving within the area of "Operations and Algebraic Thinking", evidence a difference of at least 6% lower average possible points than that of those that did not address problem solving within the same mathematics area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will demonstrate an increased ability to interact with rich mathematics tasks and make their thinking visible as evidenced by an increase of at least 10% in the overall average percent of total possible points gained on the constructed responses of the NYS Mathematics exam for grades 3, 4, and 5. Specifically, the students of grades 3, 4, and 5 will minimally achieve an average of 72%, 77%, and 58% (respectively) of the total possible points of the constructed responses. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Monday professional learning will focus on the element of activities within the component of 3c (Engaging Students in Learning) with emphasis on making thinking visible. Continued exploration within how to establish a culture to support students in making thinking visible will be explored with concentration on the cultural force of "opportunities". The professional learning will entail understanding Next Generation standards and exploring rigor and depth within tasks in order to then develop rich tasks that require students to make their thinking visible. Professional development will be set in cycles that include learning and collaboration in applying the learning to plans and practice. The following will be explored: 1. Analysis of the Activities and assignments to promote cognitive engagement with emphasis on students explaining and making their thinking visible 2. Supporting teachers in increasing the frequency of opportunities for students to make their thinking visible by incorporating daily math talks. 3. Supporting teachers in understanding the Next 4. Generation Standards and developing mathematics activities aligned to the standards, shifts and practices Increasing the quality/depth of the opportunities for students to make their thinking by studying depths of knowledge and Hess Rigor Matrix and modifying activities to require greater levels of cognitive demand. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration Lead Teachers Lead Teachers Admin overseeing TC Staff developers Follow-up and supported by administration Administration All staff All teachers meet in grade and cluster teams Identified teachers based on needs and leads in specific elements September 2018- June 2019 Teachers will plan collaboratively together and make revisions to instructional practices and curriculum activities in order to increase student engagement. Teachers College Staff developers will support teachers All 10 sessions classroom upper grade teachers in teachers grade cohorts October 2018-May 2019 7  ● Planning for balanced literacy components that increase the level of text complexity that students attend to ● Support teachers in modifying units to increase opportunities for oral and written expression When observing teacher practice, administration will provide feedback and support that is specific to the professional development within a given cycle. 10 sessions lower grade teachers Oct 2018-May 2019 October 2018-June 2019 All staff ELLs SWDs All students that are not meeting benchmark Throughout the year and daily teachers will address student groups to target learning for various needs. Administration will oversee staff. Staff will implement differentiated activities and target learning for students. Strategies to address subgroups: Staff will use data to determine specific areas of need and plan small groups with respective strategies to help students make gains in these areas Staff will use charts/tools (with visual cues) to provide scaffolds to students in order to increase engagement Videos and other multimedia that support accessibility will be utilized to maintain expectations and shifts of the standards for all students. LLI, double dosing of Fundations, and Reader's Theater will be used as a supplement to student programming in order to support student growth and achievement in ELA for both English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities 8 All stakeholders Throughout the year Administration, staff and parents will all play a role in establishing trust and implementing the noted strategies. In mathematics, supplemental programming to support students in attending to the complex structures within math word problems will be offered. The techniques of Maryann Cucciara will be utilized to offer students access into sentences. Trust is established through: Continued support by administration for staff through both feedback and professional development in 3c. Supports allocated towards continued development in this area of practice (ie. TC Staff developers, Bank Street, Algebra for All, Generation Ready, Instructional leads and liaisons, visitation to other schools) Parent involvement and partnerships to support student engagement at home and in school Feedback from Lead teachers to discuss next steps/needs of grade teams Professional Development Committee conducts needs assessments/surveys and meets to address the staffs concerns/areas for improvement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Timeline Key Personnel Activity /Engagement Description September , 2018 Teachers Meet the Teacher Teachers share expectations and provide curricula overview for families. 9  Nov. , 2018 March 2019 Teachers Parent Teacher Conferences Teachers reiterate expectations, share student progress and inform parents of goals/areas to work on with heir students. May 2019 January, 2019 April 16, 2019 Teachers Progress reports - Interim reports throughout the year to continuously share student outcomes and suggest targeted areas for growth. Curriculum & Coffee Principal/ Parent workshops 1x per month other staff October 2018- June 2019 Parent workshops to inform and support parents in helping their children explain their thinking and/or make their thinking visible will be offered throughout the year (workshops including but not limited to: book talks, writing about reading, show and tell: making thinking visible in math, problem solving November 2018 & February 2019 curriculum events (Literacy & Math) Staff student/parent activities Family events to reinforce the learning through fun activities September 2018-June 2019 Monthly correspondence Monthly newsletters sent out by grade to Teachers Newsletters inform parents of the units of study in all subject areas with some guiding questions to support oral language and/or written development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers College Staff Developers Lead Teachers 0  Content Specialists for PD/Workshops (ie. Teachers hosting parent workshops) Substitutes to make teachers available for planning and professional learning opportunities with TC and other staff development/professional learning providers. Per diem & Per session staffing Instructional Resources: TC & Go Math Assessment Materials I-Ready Units of Study Depths of Knowledge – Rigor Matrix Progressions and Problem solving rubrics Exemplar pieces Videos of teaching practice as both exemplars and as learning resources for calibrating 3c. Scheduling Adjustments: ● Common preps for grade teams ● Monday Professional Development Schedule to allocate time for collaborative teams to apply the learning of the PD session Schedules to accommodate needs of the sessions for the TC staff developers,Generation Ready, Bank Street and other pd providers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  By February 2019, at least 75% of students will show gains from the baseline assessment to the mid-year assessment within the written responses as evidenced by the school data platform By February 2019, at least 75% of observations will exemplify effective and highly effective practice within within 3c (Engaging Students in Learning) and 3b (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques) as evidenced by the ADVANCE Observation Dashboard. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) I-Ready will be used to assess baseline and to monitor growth Advance Dashboard will be utilized to determine overall percentages of ratings within Components 3c(engaging students in learning) and 3b( Using Question and discussion techniques) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: 2017-2018 School Survey Measures of "Supportive Environment":  The area of Safety was the largest percent of positive responses at 93%. The area scored 4% above the city average.  4/5 questions related to Safety measured 100% positive Needs: 2017-2018 School Survey Measures of "Supportive Environment":  84% of teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior  76% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities. o 83% of teachers say that adults at the school teach students ● 64% of reported school incidents occurred within the cafeteria and/or the playground School Leadership Team & Safety Team Meetings reflected the following:  Teachers expressed a need for greater discipline and order in the cafeteria and playground  Parent members at SLT and PTA meetings have echoed a need for order and discipline within the cafeteria . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June 2019, PS 107 will increase social emotional learning across the school community resulting in a decrease in the number of level 3, 4, and 5 incidents that occur within the cafeteria and/or playground by at least 5% as recorded in the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? P.S. 107 will develop a school-wide positive behavioral Schoolwide, Sept. School leaders, support system in which behavioral expectations are or 2018 guidance clearly defined, communicated, taught, and reinforced. Tier I- Ongoing- counselor, social 80-90% of worker, iep P.S. 107 will utilize the research-based PBIS (Positive student January teacher, school Behavioral Interventions and Supports) System population 2019 approach. Behavioral expectations will be clearly defined in accordance with school location (cafeteria/hallway/auditorium). aides, teachers, staff, parents, students. All stakeholders A respect rubric/matrix will be created to visually represent behavioral expectations in these school locations, as a starting point. ● Students in need of additional behavioral support (those Tier II & III Sept. 2018- School leaders, identified in Tier II (5-10%) and Tier III (1-5%) will ongoing guidance continue to receive at-risk counseling and/or be provided a peer mentor ● Individual behavior supports will be utilized, as needed. ● Visual Cues and translations will be utilized in order to support students with access to the components of the rubric/matrix in counselor, social worker, iep teacher 5 order to increase student participation in the initiative and reduce incidents Trust is developed through input from all stakeholders (including parents, school aides, and students) during all phases of implementation . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All stakeholders Sept. All stakeholders 2018- ongoing How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Timeline Personnel Activity Description 1x per month SLT Staff & Staff on Respect for All sub-committee SLT and Respect for all sub committee Admin and staff Information sent to parents and Meet the teacher night Parent members of the SLT and Respect for all subcommittee will be invited to provide input for the development of the Respect Matrix. Parents will be informed of the school-wide rules and matrix. Copies of the matrix will be shared with parents. Teachers and Administrators will share this with parents at the "Meet the Teacher" event. September 13, 2018 4x within the year October 2018, January, 2019 March, 2019 May, 2019 Monthly Parent Coordinator & Counselor Parent workshops Families will have opportunities to explore the school wide discipline expectations and the importance of these at home as well as in the community. Parent Coordinator Families will be invited to October 2018 - June 2019 & Counselor Assemblies school celebrations/assemblies that reinforce positive behavior (citizen of the month) 6 Teachers Class Dojo/ weekly communication (a web-based behavior management tool for the Communication via ClassDojo classroom). Weekly Throughout the year September 2018-October 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Crisis Intervention Team will hold primary responsibility for the launch and program effectiveness/impact monitoring, however, all stakeholders will provide input in the development of the system. ● Meetings will be held during the school day so that student input can be provided and schedule adjustments are at a minimum. ● Our Book of the Month Program, in which the books are chosen on the basis of the theme of Respect (for self, for others, for our environment) will be utilized to support the development of the respect matrix. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, OORS reports of occurrences within the cafeteria and playground will evidence a decrease in comparison to the 2017-2018 reports of the same time frame. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A School developed rubric and tracking tool will be used OORS incidents and Accident reports occurring during lunch periods will be tracked and monitored 7  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● Structures in scheduling for teachers to meet weekly in collaborative teams are established  All grade teams have more than one common prep time per week to meet and plan together  Monday professional learning cycles were structured to provide professional learning followed by time for teachers to work in teams to implement the professional learning as it applied to their grade needs and curriculum. ● Teachers College staff developers provide professional development to teachers 10 sessions upper grade, 10 sessions lower grades in cycles throughout the school year in alignment with the school's instructional focus. Needs: ● The School survey measures as reported within the 2017-2108 School Quality Guide" reflect the following:  The overall score of positive responses within the area of "Collaborative Teachers" was 2.66, 1.16 below the city average.  67% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have been sustained and coherently focused, rather than short-term and unrelated.  77% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. 2016-2017 Quality Review: Indicator 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development was rated developing overall   The reviewer noted, "While teachers meet and analyze student work, it typically does not result in improved teacher practice or increased student progress and achievement"  The QR also states, "The work of teacher teams resulting in progress for groups of students including English  Language Learners is not in evidence." Indicator 2.2 including the following statement within the findings,"The use of data from common assessments to make adjustments to the curriculum was not in evidence." 9  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, an increase in teacher professional learning around rich tasks and collaboration of teacher teams will result in the development of rigorous activities that require students to make their thinking visible as evidenced by the modification of at least 3 mathematics units of study per grade team. The modifications will include the development and implementation of rich tasks, routines, and shifts in pedagogy that will support students in making their thinking visible. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Professional Learning on Mondays will be spilt sessions All All year Lead Teachers  to include new learning and inquiry team time Inquiry Teams will meet every Monday to use student data to make shifts to practice and curricula in mathematics  Grade teams will use Monday time to apply new learning to units of study  6th prep per week was included for all teachers to increase planning time and to add a monthly administrative common planning with grade teams  Teacher preps include at least two common periods with  grade colleagues per week to allow for increased opportunities for collaborative planning. Lead teacher meetings to be carried out bi-weekly. Lead meetings will include vertical planning and support for inquiry studies across the building.  Bank Street, Generation Ready, & Algebra for all consultants/pd to support increased content knowledge which will result in improved practices and activities within mathematics  Teachers college staff developers to support unit planning to include activities that require oral and written expression of thinking.  Professional learning on the inquiry process, utilizing data and progress monitoring to support teams in conducting action research.  Technologies used to support data gathering and identifying needs of students (ie I-ready, Mastery Connect, Near Pod, Tc Assessment Pro) teachers select and All Mondays administration teachers 1x per All teachers 2 lead week Administration teachers minimally Administration per grade - 1 x per TC Staff at least 1 week Developers represented throughout Data Specialist at each the year Lead All grade meeting teams- 10 All sessions teachers Throughout All the year teacher ● Collaborative Inquiry Teams to focus on ENL students All students ● Planning documents to include strategies to meet the needs of students in sub-groups All teachers and Administration Throughout the year within cycles of inquiry 1 Throughout the year All stakeholders Trust is established across all stakeholders ● Teacher revisions and plans include ideas for tools and charts to support access for all students ● Teacher revisions to include small group strategies to address the needs of various learners Trust is developed through ● Collaborations and sharing amongst colleagues within weekly meetings ● Support by administration through professional development and feedback aligned to the goal of using data to target student learning ● Partnerships with parents in working towards engaging students based on their needs ● Student needs being addressed in small groups 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Timeline Personnel Activity Description teachers Tuesday workshops Teachers to support parents (along with their children) with the implementation of strategies for units of study through a hands on interactive approach (1x math, 1x literacy) Admin Curriculum and Coffee Meetings with principal to support parents with curriculum and to discuss parent wishes for types/areas for activities and workshops Teachers & Staff Parent Teacher Conferences Conferences with parents to discuss the needs and progress of students. bi-monthly October 2018- June 2019 monthly October 2018- June 2019 Nov., Mar, & May Tuesdays 2 throughout the year Sept 2018-June 2019 Staff /Families Committee Meetings Staff and parents will form sub committees that collaborate on analyzing data and make shifts for favorable outcomes towards school-wide goals (ie Respect for All committee) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: ● Administration/ lead teachers/content specialists to conduct professional learning and lead collaborative meetings ● Coaches/consultants for mathematics including: Generation Ready & Bank Street  Teachers College Staff Developers and Network Support Staff to support team planning and utilization of data to support student needs ● Administration to provide and support staff in accessing data documents that summarize class and school data Instructional Resources: ● Units of Study ● Unit Maps and plans (both program made and teacher revised) Schedule Adjustments: ● Common Preps for grade teams ● Additional prep per week - 1 allocated per month to unit planning with admin ● Monday Professional Development time to encompass professional learning and collaborative teams ● Tuesday Other professional work time to allow the option of collaborative planning and inquiry ● Bi- weekly Instructional Lead meetings to support implementation of the professional learning within Collaborative Teams Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 3  X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 1 units s of study within each of the disciplines will be revised to include activities/questions that require students to make their thinking visible By February 2019, teacher collaboration and contributions to curricula revisions will increase resulting in at least 5% gains in responses on a school developed survey on the area of "Collaborative Teachers" for pre to interim survey. By February 2019, 100% of teams will have landed a strategy/technique and will be conducting action research as evidenced by administrator's review of inquiry teams utilizing a school made inquiry checklist. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A school developed system for tracking and rating the quality of activities submitted by grade teams A school developed survey that emulates the questions within the area of Collaborative Teachers will be utilized to track progress and make shifts to practice with collaborative teams based on staff responses A school made checklist will be utilized to identify critical qualities of collaborative inquiry in order to provide feedback and determine next steps to support teams in increasing their collaboration and contributions to the units of study and teaching practice. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: 2016-2017 Quality Review:  The Area of Celebration was indicator 4.1 (Teacher Supports and Supervision )  Stated, "A review of teacher observations indicates that school leaders provide teachers with specific, guiding feedback resulting in teacher’s implementing schoolwide initiatives and improving their pedagogy."  The reviewer noted, "Professional development sessions are aligned with feedback in teacher observation  reports and the support given the teachers" Indicator 3.4 (High Expectations) was an area that was proficient. The reviewer states, "School leaders communicate high expectations connected to professionalism and college and career readiness to the entire staff, students, and their families." 2017 - 2018 School Survey:  Increases in positive responses from families were evidenced across all questions within "Inclusive Leadership". Positive responses ranged from 92% - 96%. o 92% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning o 87% of teachers say that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress Needs: 2017- 2018 School Survey Measures:  The overall score within "Effective School Leadership" was 2.85, below the city average by .76.  77% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school communicates a clear vision for their school.  75% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development.  60% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school participates in instructional planning with teams of teachers.  77% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that at their school, once they start a new program, they follow up to make sure that it’s working. 5  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, an increase in the distribution of leadership within professional learning and instructional decision making will result in an increase in teacher influence in the design of instruction and materials/resources as evidenced by a score of 63 or more in the area of "Teacher Influence" on the School Quality Guide" 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development will support learning All staff All year – Administration and implementation by providing the learning as Instructional select well as the time to engage in the implementation Lead Mondays and content specialists (literacy and of the learning with colleagues on Monday Teachers 1x per mnth- sessions whole ● Professional development will support clear Principal staff pd math liaisons,, Teachers College Staff understanding through modeling and/or use of videos, samples, exemplars and/or non-examples Instructional Cabinet 1x per pd cycle Developers) ● PD Briefs (letters to teachers) will capture the Lead Teachers Twice a month Oct- June and Administration learning from the PD and the expectations set Throughout Administration forth from the pd ● Lead teacher meetings to support grade team implementation of the professional learning aligned to the instructional focus ● Feedback will be provided to teachers in elements of the year- Cycles: Oct- Mid Nov Late Nov-Jan Jan-early March Mid March- early May 7  focus with the professional learning cycle to support teacher implementation of the learning ● Cycles of observations to be conducted to provide a more supportive cycle of feedback and implementation of next steps with forms being completed within a 3 week window from the observation ● Principal participation in Supervisory Inquiry regarding feedback and observation practices * Periodic surveys in regards to feedback and professional learning will be used to monitor and revise leadership practice Professional development to support strategies All staff for students in various sub-groups ● Feedback to the teachers to incorporate strategies to support access and learning for all students ● Sharing of materials and best practices from ELL liaison. Trust is developed through: ● Supportive feedback to teachers to improve teaching practice ● Cycles between observation feedback and follow-up observations ● Professional development aligned to effective practices and consistent with instructional focus ● Administrative support and availability to meet and work with grade teams ● Establishment of partnerships with parents to at least 1 Monday per Month Administration, and TC developers All stakeholders Throughout the year Administration and SLT members 8 support the consistency of the implementation of the instructional focus 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Timeline Personnel Activity/Strategy Description Administration and staff Parent Workshops/ Workshops for parents aligned to the instructional focus will be held to support parents in understanding and partnering with teachers in achieving favorable outcomes for their children. Administration Curriculum and Coffee Feedback from parents to administration will be used to adjust pd and curricula needs of students based on parent requests and/or perspective fof their children's successes with the areas of focus SLT members Data Review & Progress Monitoring SLT parent members will collaborate with staff to review interim survey results of leadership practice aligned to increased communication and will revise action plans and provide to improve leadership practices. 1x per month Oct 2018- June 2019 1x per month October 2018 - June 2019 October 2018 January 2019 April 2019 June 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 9  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: ● Administrators to conduct observations and walkthroughs ● Lead teachers and sub committee members to further message school goals/strategies and support colleagues in the implementation ● Teacher's College Staff developers to provide instructional support and support the communication of school goals. Instructional Resources: ● Danielson Framework ● Teachers College documents to support implementation of workshop model teaching and curricula practices aligned to engaging students in learning ● Videos and samples to support exploration and/or to serve as models for professional learning ● School-wide assessment materials and progressions of learning within and across grades ● Leveraging Leadership (professional text to support leadership and increase capacity/accessibility of school leaders) Schedule adjustments: ● Monthly Curriculum and Coffee provided during am and pm sessions ● Cyclic observation and feedback cycles ● Tuesday Parent Engagement Time scheduled by teachers across a grade ● One prep per month to go to grade planning with administration Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Within each cycle, 75% of all conducted observations will be entered into the system within 3 weeks of the observation date as measured by school developed tracking system. 0  By February 2019, school leaders will conduct 50% of teacher observations and provide feedback related to the instructional focus and professional learning cycle as evidenced in the ADVANCE Dashboard By February 2019, interim survey reports will indicate at least 70% positive responses in regards to the timeliness, quality, and alignment of feedback and professional learning to the instructional focus. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School developed Teacher surveys on quality of feedback and professional learning will be utilized to monitor satisfaction of timeliness, quality and alignment of feedback Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: 2016-2017 Quality Review indicates:  Parents stated that student achievement information is provided through notices sent home via backpack, a Coffee with the Principal, and an online grade book. 2017-2018 School Survey :  9/11 parent responses within the area of strong community ties ranged from 90-97% positive  3/4 teacher responses in the area of strong community ties ranged between 93-100% positive. Needs: 2016-2017 Quality Review indicates:  While parents feel they have information on student achievement and the Common Core, they expressed the feeling that they are not as yet in full partnership with their students’ learning. 2017-2018 School Survey  89% of parents/guardians responded that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event  93% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit classrooms to observe the instructional program. (the lowest positive response by teachers in this area, 4% below te district average) o SLT parent members have expressed a desire for more frequent communication specific to their child's grade and/or their child's performance  Parent attendance to curriculum events are significantly lower than events involving student activities and/or student performances Part 2 – Annual Goal 2  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 107 will increase parent communication and engagement opportunities that are specific to their child’s learning resulting in at least 60% of students showing movement of at least 1 profile level within their I-Ready assessment. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Continue to offer Curriculum and Coffee opportunities to be All Weekly Administration offered bi-monthly and during am and pm sessions with pm sessions where children activities are included families throughout and clusters the year All classroom Throughout teachers the year 1x Classroom per writing teachers unit Monthly throughout the year ● Use of Class Dojo to support communication of individual student progress as well as to communicate class-wide announcements weekly ● Parent engagement opportunities to include overview of unit rubrics, and exemplars to assist parents with supporting their children in targeting student learning/next steps ● Parent engagement opportunities monthly to support parent familiarity with new math approaches and higher level questioning/thinking ●Letters sent to parents sent each time a child progresses in reading level to share the child's progress and better inform parents of a child's current level of performance. ●Interim reports sent to families ●Student goals and strategies to meet goal shared with students and families within each unit of study 4 Parent workshops offered for English Language Learners through Open Doors workshops ELLs SWDs Throughout the year at least 1x per new unit Administration and teachers. ● Special Education teachers support parents by offering strategies to support their children through classroom engagement opportunities ● Translations and translators available for events and home correspondence Trust is developed through: ● Collaboration with parents ● Increased opportunities for parent and staff interactions ● Support for parents in school focus and curricula All stakeholders Throughout the year All stakeholders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Timeline Personnel Activity Description Monthly Monthly Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Paras, & Administration Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Paras, & Administration Parent Workshops Workshops to be held in both am and pm sessions on varying days of the week to increase attendance Parent Workshops Pm workshops to include interactions with students to increase parent participation Bi-Monthly Teachers Classroom/Grade workshops & Events October Workshops offered by classroom teachers to increase specificity of topic covered to align with child’s learning for their grade Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Paras, & Administration, December February May Family Fun events Family fun events to include fun and engaging activities that are connected to the curriculum and will support both students and their families 5  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: ● Administration and content specialists to host curriculum and coffee workshops ● Parent Coordinator to support in preparation and facilitation of workshops ● Teachers to conduct parent engagement opportunities on Tuesdays and host class/grade specific events Instructional Resources: ● Unit rubrics and exemplars to share with families ● Go Math guides to determine and share new strategies for mathematics with parents ● Teacher developed tools to support family engagement in learning new mathematical approaches Schedule Adjustments: ● Tuesday Parent engagement time to accommodate parent workshops in classrooms ● Monthly Curriculum Coffee workshops offered during am and pm sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG X X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February a minimum of 3 Curriculum and Coffee workshops connected to student activities will have been offered  By February at least 40% of students will have made gains in a targeted area  By February, at least 75% of classrooms will be utilizing class dojo or the like as a communication tool for progress monitoring  By February classroom teachers will have hosted at least two parent workshops in reading and in mathematics connected to supporting families with their child's learning  By February classroom teachers will have communicated at least one mid-term progress report to parents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 6  Calendar of parent workshops will be developed with parent coordinator communicating the events to parents- Calendars and correspondence will evidence the benchmark Administration will develop a calendar and tracking tool for progress reporting to parents through the school year. The tracking tool will evidence the progress reporting named Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in K-2: Students performing a year below grade benchmark in ELAassessments. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Need oriented Small group and or During the school instruction based on 1-1 conferences running record assessment (ie. day Students performing fluency, retelling, below the following scale scores on the etc) State Exams: Grade 3 – below 299 Grade 4 - below 296 Grade 5 – below 296 Students in K-2: Students performing at level one on gradeassessments within mathematics. Mathematics Need oriented Small group and or During the school instruction based on 1-1 conferences mathematics assessments and problem solving day Students performing below the following rubric. 8 Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) scale scores on the State Exams: Grade 3 – below 293 Grade 4 - below 284 Grade 5 – below 289 Students performing 1 year or more below grade level reading within science content reading. Students performing 1 year or more below grade level reading within social studies content reading Teacher referral to Need oriented instruction based on content reading and vocabulary Need oriented instructionbased on content reading and vocabulary Small group and 1-1 conferences During the school day Small group and 1-1 conferences During the school day Strategies and Peer mediation During the school day RTI team and RTI interventions Individual session team determined by and/or group recommendations student need. Peer sessions based on mediation, at risk counseling, specificity of each case. etc may be utilized. based on observation, discussions with teachers and parents, and/or or parent request. 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 80 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Both Academic and Enrichment Clubs will be offered to students within temporary housing. Supplies and clothing will also be purchased to supplement student's needs for required materials in school in order to offset parent costs for supplies and clothing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Teacher certification and licensing is considered to ensure highly qualified teachers are teaching across PS 107. In addition, all hired candidates are interviewed and selected through a rigorous process including: 1. Responding to interview questions regarding practice and experiences/qualifications 2. Analyzing a set of data to determine student needs and instructional practices to ensure student needs are met 3. Teaching a demo lesson and debriefing the lesson with an interview team. Once hired, PS 107 ensures the quality of teaching through high quality professional development as follows: 1. Professional development for staff aligned school and city initiatives 2. Providing new teachers with mentors to support and coach practice 3. Sending staff to workshops and trainings to support practice and initiatives 4. Hiring staff developers from Teacher's college to work with teachers in small groups and on 1-1 visits Staff assignments and retention are determined through the following: 1. Teachers complete preference sheets in te Spring in which they specify three grades that they are interested in teaching 2. The principal reviews preferences and makes decisions based on qualifications, teacher experiences, and assignments that are most advisable for the success of students within a grade and across the school. 2  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teacher's College Staff developers are hired to support both staff and administration in developing Literacy practices consistent across the school and aligned to the standards. Algebra for All professional learning opportunities, consultants from Bank Street and a coach from Generation Ready will support the development and implementation of best practices in mathematics for school leaders and teachers. Staff liaisons are sent to professional learning opportunities offered by the BFSC and other professional learning partners to support practice in the school. This includes, paraprofessionals, special education liaisons and ENL liaisons. Professional time on Mondays is devoted to professional learning across all members of the school that is aligned to the school's instructional focus and/or initiatives and professional support that is needed/requested from the staff via surveys and/or areas for improvement identified in observation reports. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-K teachers within the building are in communication with Kindergarten teachers and share student records/portfolios with the students' upcoming teacher. Pre-K students and their families are invited to all PS 107 events, including Family Fun Days, Dances, Curriculum & Coffees, etc. At the close of the year, we offer a Kindergarten orientation to families in which the families have the opportunity to hear about the Kindergarten expectations and routines that their child will be transitioning to. In May, families are invited to meet the Kindergarten team of teachers and visit the Kindergarten classrooms to hear and see first hand what their children will be a part of. During this meeting children are welcome to attend and often do accompany their parents. 3  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers and administrators meet together to analyze data and make instructional decisions based on assessment results. Specifically, vertical teams of instructional leads and administrators meet together to analyze assessments/data and determine school-wide areas of strength and needs. Grade cohorts meet together to make adjustments to curriculum based on assessment/data analysis. Professional development on the administration of assessments, the analysis of assessments , and the implications of shifts in instructional practice and grouping of students is provided across professional development cycles on Mondays throughout the school year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $ 377,003 $ 93, 288 $26,574 0 $5,804629 X X X Na X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 NA Section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool 4  to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 107Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 107Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) [PS 107Q] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 8  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 1  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS 107 offers various Title III programs to support ENL students. The purpose of each program is to support students in their stage of language development in order to aide students in acquiring language. Our data indicates that students at entering and emerging stages of development in the upper grades are performing lowest in the written portion within the NYSESLAT. In addition, state exam data reflects that only 2.33% of ENL students scored level 3. No students scored at level 4 proficiency. Developing reading ability and writing ability for students is therefore a need. Analysis of our curriculum indicated that structured teaching for basic phonemic awareness and foundational skills is not part of the grade level (3-5) curriculum. Strategies to support reading fluency and decoding strategies are reduced in these grades as well. In order to increase student's reading level and comprehension as well as student's ability to write about their reading, supplemental supports to develop reading ability are needed. Since research shows correlations between oral language development & reading development as prerequisites to further develop a child's writing ability, PS 107 offers the following supplemental programs: 1.Fundations Morning Program- The program offers foundational phonemic and word study skills to students in grades 2-5 that are within the entering and emerging stages of language development. Fundations is not offered within these grade levels within the school. Recognizing that our students are learning a new language and are in need of foundational phonemic and phonological skills, the program will close the gap and provide students with the areas of phonemic development that are presenting a difficulty in their language acquisition. The Fundations Morning program begins in November and runs for 20 weeks until April. The Fundations Program will be offered 3 days a week for 40 minutes per day (120 minutes per week). Each of the three classes will be taught by a certified ENL teacher in English and will have no more than 15 students with similar needs in regards to the stages of phonemic development. Fundations materials will be utilized to address students phonological needs. These materials involve a multi-sensory approach including utilizing dry erase boards, magnetic letter boards, visual picture/word/sound cards, etc. in order to introduce and reinforce phonemic development within the English Language. 2. Reader's Theater- P.S. 107 provides an enrichment program for ENLs utilizing Reader's Theater as an avenue to target student academic gaps within literacy and language acquisition through arts and literacy integration. Reader's Theater helps students approach and meet grade-level Common Core Learning Standards benchmarks by building language and literacy skills while making textual connections across genres and extending content knowledge. The program will be offered to ENL students across grades K-5. 1.5 hour sessions will be held twice a week from October through April conducted by 4 ESL teachers along side 2 content area teachers within the arts. At the beginning of the program, all students are assessed by iReady Diagnostic. Based on the results, ESL teachers split students into 4 groups of 20 students, of which an arts content teacher and an ESL licensed teacher will co -teach and plan instructional 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information activities through Reader’s Theater to target identified areas of need. The teachers will utilize team teaching models, with emphasis on parallel teaching and station teaching models, in order to reduce group sizes and target instruction for students. Teachers will provide direct instruction to students in reading fluency, oral language and vocabulary development. Students will be involved in integrated learning projects in which the arts and language acquisition are merged. The students will engage in enrichment activities including developing costumes, props, scenery, and songs for the production of the Reader's Theater Scripts. In addition to the development of language through arts, the students will engage in small group targeted learning sessions in which they are involved in Close Reading of the scripts. During the Close Reading, students will explore sentence structure, vocabulary, and comprehension development. Students of all proficiency levels will collaborate and contribute in a supportive setting. Readers Theater scripts and teaching materials are utilized, as well as teacher developed materials and resources. MORNING PROGRAM/SCIENCE: In April and May, ESL teachers collaborate with our upper grade Science teacher to provide additional Morning program support to 4th grade ELLs and transitional ELLs who are preparing for the NYS Science Test. Two ESL teachers and one upper grade Science teacher meet for one hour of professional development prior to the start of the program. Based on the vocabulary, content concepts and language structures needed for science instruction, ESL teachers model and provide explicit strategies and best practices to reach all entry points. During the instructional sessions, teachers work collaboratively to support students in their acquisition of scientific language and concepts. In addition to the whole class instruction, teachers provide small group instruction and individual support as needed. Our science teacher provides all texts and materials for hands-on activities that support student learning in the classrooms and in the science lab. The lab component encourages oral language development as students explore the science concepts through hands on inquiries. AFTERNOON PROGRAM/OPEN DOORS WORKSHOPS: P.S. 107 holds Open Doors workshops which are open to all Grade K – 5 ELLs and their parents. Workshops are held 4 times a year after school (2:30 to 4:00 p.m.) from October through May. The workshops are collaboratively presented by two certified ESL teachers, and one content specific teacher (ie. science, art) and our Parent Coordinator. ENL and content specific teachers meet for approximately one hour of professional development prior to each workshop. Based on the vocabulary, content concepts and language structures needed for each specific workshop content, ESL teachers model and provide explicit strategies and best practices to reach all entry points. Each Open Doors workshop focuses on a specific activity in art, science, mathematics, or social studies and encourages authentic communication based on hands-on activities. For example, the Ecosystems workshop focuses on the interdependence of organisms. During the lesson, teachers introduce vocabulary and model language structures needed to support students in their speaking and writing. Then students follow directions to create their own terrarium with sand, soil, rocks, plants and an insect to take home. There is a culminating group discussion and writing activity to reinforce the lesson. Parents are encouraged to accompany their children in order to experience an academic activity in the school setting. Within each program, student attendance will be taken by the program teacher. These will be kept on file by the teacher and later collected and filed within the office. Student data will be kept and tracked by the program teacher as a means of progress monitoring and providing targeted learning experiences to the students within the program (flexible groupings). The program teacher will be responsible for sharing student performance and progress with his/her students' parents/guardians. All notifications will be translated to support family engagement. These notifications will be translated by staff members of PS 107. Interpretation services will be utilized for individual parent conferences/meetings. 5 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: At P.S. 107, professional development is connected to our school-wide instructional focus: using assessment to drive targeted learning experiences. Using the iReady Diagnostic program in the morning, our ENL teachers pinpoint specific areas of need for each ELL. The ENL teachers share this data to advise and support grades, teachers and instructional teams with ENL strategies to target ELL gaps and improve outcomes. Our two ESL teachers also provide professional development to Art and Science teachers in order to deliver before- and after-school programs that conform with best ESL practices and support our students in their acquisition of content-specific vocabulary and language forms. One hour of PD will be provided to the Science teacher prior to Morning Science program. Approximately one hour of PD will be provided to the Art teacher and Science teacher prior to each Open Doors workshop. Professional Learning will be conducted by an administrtaor under the guidance of the work and professional learning that the principal is engaging in with District principals and with Maria Vasiliou of the FSC. Our lead ESL teacher attends professional development offered by the FSC, and turnkeys the information to staff. ESL professional development support is available to all personnel including all classroom teachers, out-of-classroom teachers, service providers and paraprofessionals. This is done on a school-wide basis, on a grade-level basis, and on an individual needs basis. ESL teachers are active RTI members who model and provide strategies in the RTI model for all students. ESL teachers provide new teachers and service providers with training in ESL strategies in order to support their professional growth and impact student achievement. Common preps, the 80-minute block for training and weekly RTI meetings allow ESL teachers the flexibility to deliver PD depending on scheduling and availability. Election Day, Chancellors Day and three paraprofessional workshops during the year are also available for professional development delivered by ESL teachers. ESL teachers provide and model school-wide personnel with guided practice of ESL strategies such as "juicy sentences," BICS/CALP wordplay, deconstruction/reconstruction of text, discussion and questioning. ESL teachers also provide scaffolding supports such as previewing text, pre-teaching content-specific vocabulary and the use of graphic organizers. These professional development offerings will result in shifts in language acquisition, reading ability, and written responses of our ENL students. Elizabeth Watts, Jean Scire, Lanna Tabacchino, and Yuk Mui (Cindy) Dong will provide professional learning and supports to the staff. These teachers will be a part of ongoing professional learning offered by the FSC. Professional Development Cycles offered by Maria Vasiliou and Calendar Days offered by Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project 6  Part C: Professional Development (TCRWP) will be attended by ENL teachers in order to continue to develop the repertoire of best practices for ENL students. Records of professional Learning will be maintained at the school within the office. Agendas and attendance sheets will reflect the sessions held within the school. Printouts of the FSC and TCRWP offerings and school sign up will be held. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The P.S. 107 school community encourages a high level of parent involvement among ELLs and non-ELLs alike. Our school is a welcoming environment for students, families and visitors. Our PTA is a large and committed membership who contribute their time and energy to many projects that benefit our school and school community. Our Parent Coordinator creates, organizes and facilitates many opportunities for parent and family involvement in the way of day- and night-time and weekend workshops. All parents are invited to attend all workshops, activities and clubs that are offered at our school. The workshops held vary from being specific in topic based on the school's need to being generalized activities that encourage parents to be involved in a fun way within the school. Coffee and curriculum activities are geared towards specific needs of the school based on data, For example, the school's Math data revealed a need to support student in the constructed responses. As a result, the school is offering workshops in supporting writing within mathematics and using GoMath Online to support children at home. Data revealed that ENL students are under achieving on state exams. A push to increase reading abilities of students has led to a parent workshop on developing our readers at home and providing parents with strategies to help them to increase their child's reading stamina and comprehension at home. Since the writing portion of the NYSESLAT is the lowest scoring portion of the exam for the majority of our ENL students, a workshop to support parents on writing about reading and utilizing a rubric to develop stronger writing is offered. Other activities that encourage parent participation within the school and support parents in understanding the expectations are: Daddy and Me, Build-a-Kite, Bullying Prevention, Preparing for New York State tests, Family Fun Day, Family Craft Nights, Successful Parent-Teacher Conferences, Organizing your Child, Teaching Good Manners, Movie Night, Candyland, Gingerbread Houses and Adult Book Club. We also make two trips per year to Broadway shows. In particular, ELL parents participate in school activities because P.S. 107 does not let language act as a barrier to a full and representative community. Weekly emails are sent to all families by our parent coordinator highlighting free or low-cost local activities. Parent notices and other documents go home in the preferred language of communication, and bilingual staff are available to assist ELL families. At P.S. 107, communication between school and all parents is full, open and ongoing. For specifically ELL-focused parent involvement, our school hosts Open Doors workshops. The focus of the workshops is academic, but it is open to all ELL parents or guardians. This serves 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities as a way to support and celebrate ELL parent involvement, as parents are able to experience their children at work in a learning situation and also enjoying a hands-on activity. They are also encouraged to inquire about their children's science and art curriculum. Workshops are held once a month after school from October through May and presented collaborative by ESL teachers, Art and Science teachers, Parent Coordinator and bilingual Paraprofessionals (for parent translation purposes). Refreshments are provided. Workshops include the Ecosystem Terrariums, Thanksgiving History with Cranberry Sauce, March Winds and Kite-Making, Lunar vs. Solar Calendars and Lanterns, and others. Records are kept and maintained with the parent coordinator. Agendas and sign in sheets are kept for each meeting. The parent coordinator issues invitations to the families through multiple formats. Each of these (paper, email, phone call) are sent out in multiple languages, in order to accommodate the needs of our families and encourage participation by all. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $25,190  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 120 hrs -- Fundations Morning Program 270 hrs -- Reader's Theatre After School ENL Enrichment 18 hrs -- Open Doors Program 50 hrs-- Science Content ENL Program NA and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel 1384 - Fundations Materials - Art Materials for Reader's Theater - Close Reading Texts and reproducables NA NA 8 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA Other TOTAL NA NA 26574 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Queens District 25 School Name PS 107 - The Thomas Dooley School School Number 107 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lori Cummings Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Xiaorui Chen/ Bilingual Teache Teacher/Subject Area Priscilia Phang/ ESL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Lanna Ardolino/ENL Teacher Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Sara Cangelosi Coach School Counselor Nora Tomei Parent Emalyn Santiago Parent Coordinator Ourania Malandrakis Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Natasa Mijatovic/IEP Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 7 0 7 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 2 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 993 Total number of ELLs 263 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.49% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): Mandarin If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Mandarin TBE TBE DL Mandarin(12:1:1 Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-2018 2018-2019 2017-2018 K 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 Tot # 2 1 0 2 0 0 5 3 2 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At P.S. 107, Fountas and Pinnell is the primary literacy assessment tool used to generate data about early literacy skills for all students including ELLs. The Fountas and Pinnell assessment system provides teachers with an overall reading level, which is determined by combining data on accuracy and comprehension. In grades K-2 Fundations assessments are also utilized to determine a child's level of mastery with phonemic and phonological awareness. The data often reveals that ELLs are performing at levels that are behind their grade-level peers due to their limited understanding of academic language and 1  content area concepts, which affect overall reading comprehension. As a result of these findings, instruction for ELLs focuses on vocabulary acquisition, word identification/accuracy and reading comprehension. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All staff have been trained in the administration of Fountas and Pinnell and Fundations assessments. Furthermore, training has been provided to staff on the analysis of these assessments to identify priority areas of growth for individual students. An online platform is utilized for the input and tracking of assessment data. The platform allows any staff member who provides instruction to a student to be able to view his/her assessment data. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At P.S. 107, 77% of ELLs are within their first three years of service. The remaining 22% are developing ELLs within the 4-6 years of service range. Our ESL program demographics reflect typical expected patterns of language acquisition in elementary education students. We evaluate the success of our students based on quantifiable and qualitative data. First, we use various quantifiable assessment data to gauge different factors. Some of these factors include English language proficiency levels (results of NYSESLAT); reading levels (results of Fountas and Pinnell assessments) and content area knowledge (results of NYS ELA, Math and Science tests). Next, we utilize qualitative data to integrate the numbers with the actual students in our charge. Conferencing, conversations, anecdotal records, student portfolios, and our relationships with students and their families provide a wellrounded picture of our ELL population. Formative and summative data inform our decisions in how to place students in appropriate groupings and what to focus on in instruction. Based on the data, our students have made great strides in Listening and Speaking, but still need extra support in the academic areas of Reading and Writing, especially considering the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Given this, we will continue to focus on and improve our instructional practices in order to support the success of our ELLs in academic areas. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We consider the deficits we see in ELL students and consequently apply instructional practices that best meet those needs. Some of the types of data we review are student work samples, Fountas & Pinnell reading levels and other school-wide and classroom assessments. The RTI team, including ESL teachers, comes together regularly and reviews students who have been identified by their teachers as students in need of additional support. Both ESL and intervention strategies are implemented to support both ELL and non-ELL students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. On the Kindergarten NYSITELL, the data shows that 50% of the students scored at the Entering and Emerging levels and the other 50% scored at Transitioning or Expanding. With current first graders, 24% scored at the Entering and Emerging levels, while 51% are Transitioning or expanding and 25% are Commanding. In second grade, 16% of students scored at the Entering or Emerging levels, 52% at the Transitioning and Expanding and 30% at the Commanding levels. In third grade, 27% scored Entering or Emerging, 30% Transitioning or Expanding and 43% are Commanding. With grade four students, 25% are at the Entering or Emerging levels, 41% are Transitioning or Expanding and 32% are Commanding. In fifth grade, 37% are Entering or Emerging, 25% are Transitioning or Expanding and 37% scored Commanding. In PS 107 across grade levels, 30% of the ESL population are at the Entering or Emerging levels, 45% are Transitioning or Expanding and 25% of the students are at the Commanding level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At P.S. 107, ENL instruction is delivered via the pull-out and push-in model. Students who took the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT who scored at the Entering and Emerging levels are pulled out in small groups to be given stand-alone ENL with certified ENL teachers in age-appropriate groupings for the mandated stand-alone minutes. Integrated instruction is provided through a push-in model in classrooms by an ENL-certified teacher for the remaining mandated minutes. For some students who score at the Entering and Emerging level, those minutes are provided weekly by their classroom teacher if their classroom teacher is both Common Branch- and TESOL-certified. Students scoring at the Transitioning, Expanding or Commanding levels are provided the mandated minutes per week of integrated instruction in their classroom via push-in model with an ENL-certified teacher. Teachers holding both common branch and TESOL certification provide the mandated minutes of integrated instruction to these students scoring at the Transitioning, Expanding or Commanding levels in their classrooms. ENL and classroom teachers meet regularly in order to align curriculum and instruction, to discuss student progress and to collaborate strategies to maintain school-wide consistency of focus and instructional support. The standalone ENL program at P.S.107 tends to be homogeneous since we group our students according to proficiency and grade level. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL stand-alone and integrated instruction is delivered by certified ENL teachers and dually licensed Common Branch/TESOL teachers in the pull-out and push-in models. Entering and Emerging ELLs are arranged in homogeneous groupings for the pull-out model and receive instruction in the four modalities based on the mandated number of instructional minutes required by CR Part 154. ENL integrated instruction is delivered by our school's English as a New Language program according to mandated instructional minutes for each proficiency level. ELA instruction is delivered by certified Elementary 3  Education classroom teachers who schedule Reader’s and Writer’s Workshop periods daily. Our program model does not include NLA instruction as we do not have dual language or bilingual programs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers access grade-level curriculum in order to align ENL instruction with general curriculum and content areas. ENL and classroom teachers confer on a regular basis to ensure alignment of content area instruction in order to maintain school-wide consistency of focus to support ELLs throughout the school. ENL methodologies, such as scaffolding, text deconstruction, accessing prior knowledge, using graphic organizers and other strategies learned during professional development, are employed in order to promote and support learning in the content areas while enriching language development at the same time. As such, the English as a New Language program uses English but with native language support in the form of bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, translation websites, and support from bilingual staff members when needed. To meet the demands of the new standards, ENL teachers focus on academic vocabulary and text-based responses both oral and written. Materials used in the ENL program include a large library of non-fiction trade books that support language development while delivering information in the content areas such as Social Studies and Science. These non-fiction texts lend themselves to the focus of the instructional shifts. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? By the nature of the English as a New Language program, we do not evaluate students in their Native Language (e.g. unlike Transitional Bilingual Education or Dual Language programs). However, in order to support Native Language, bilingual picture dictionaries in our community’s major home languages are available to all ELLs. Children are always encouraged to bring native language materials to school to share with teachers and classmates, and to aid in the transitional period of adjustment they experience as newcomers. Bilingual staff are on hand to support students and their families. In addition, ENL teachers encourage ELL families to maintain the use of their L1 at home in order to promote literacy skills that transfer from the native language to English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Currently, we do not have any SIFE students at P.S. 107. Our plan makes available all existing support structures that might benefit the student such as RTI support and small group instruction. ENL teachers share instructional techniques and resources with classroom teachers in order to support students at appropriate levels such as modified grade-level texts, differentiation through lesson presentation or through modified tasks. At P.S. 107, teachers provide newly-arrived ELLs with classroom buddies who speak the same native language to support in transitioning to English. This helps lower the affective filter for language acquisition. In addition, bilingual picture dictionaries and dual language glossaries are in place to help support new learning. Support is provided to classroom teachers of these students by ENL teachers with strategies and techniques to support language and content learning. Some of our students at P.S. 107 are considered Developing ELLs with four to six years of service. Of these 58 students, 22 of these these have IEPs and are placed in more restrictive settings (ICT or 12:1:1). Our plan for these students includes their 4  participating in Title IIII Morning program for additional support, as well as Related Services as required by their individual academic needs and IEPs. Small group targeted instruction especially in reading and writing is provided for these students. At P.S. 107 there are no students who are receiving 7 or more years of ENL instruction. We will continue to monitor our population and plan for their needs as individual situations arise. However, we would continue to provide Title III Morning program for additional support, as well as small group targeted instruction and Related Services as required by their individual academic needs and IEPS. Additionally, differentitation through teaching and explicit instruction, differentiated product or task and differentiated content material could be provided as other ways of support. Former ELLs receive test accommodations and ninety minutes of integrated ENL instruction as per New York state mandates. ENL teachers continue to provide classroom teachers with strategies, resources and support for former ELLs who are in their classrooms. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Same P.S. 107 students with disabilities including cognitive and physical special needs, medically fragile students, etc. who are identified as ELLs are included in the mainstream ENL program based on collaborative judgment between ENL teachers and our school’s Health Coordinator. Both ENL and Special Education strategies and instructional methods, such as scaffolding, building background knowledge and differentiation, are utilized in order to maximize the educational benefit to these children based on their individual learning needs. Grade-level materials are provided with additional support such as deconstructing/reconstructing of text in order to support growth in content-area knowledge. Students in all grades and classrooms have acccess to appropraite grade level content materials and curriculum. Our school uses Teachers College Reading and Writing Workshop curriculum for literacy and Go Math for mathematics curriculum. These materials, combined with the instructional strategies, support English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At P.S. 107, all our resources are utilized to deliver appropriate instruction to all students. Small instructional groups are formed by a combination of grade- and proficiency- level, and are scheduled in order to accommodate all mandated services. Scheduling and programing flexibility is also enabled by the various approaches and models we utilize. In addition to self-contained special education classes, we have ICT classes on every grade. When appropriate, we provide for students to be mainstreamed during math and/or Readers and Writers Workshop and provide students with additional supports such as SETTS services. ENL strategies and materials are shared with all other providers of instruction in order to assist in all students making maximum gains and 5  growth. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our Response to Intervention program at P.S. 107 targets ELA and Math skills to students identified as needing intervention services in these areas. ELLs also benenefit from the morning programs where focus is on oral language, vocabulary development and ELA. Morning Science program provides support for Science content area. Where appropriate and/or mandated, ELLs attend SETSS sessions tailored to their specific academic needs. At-risk Speech services are also given to students identified as in need of support through RTI. All services and programs are offered in English. Additionally, we have a licensed Chinese speaking Speech Provider and licensed Spanish speaking Speech Provider who can assess and provide support to ELLs who speak those languages. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Within the upcoming year we intend to utilze Fundations for students that are at early emergent stages of reading. While Fundations has always been utilized in Kindergarten and first grade, we have seen great movement in students aquiring reading skills and making movement across reading levels through the multi-sensory approach. Consequently, Fundations will be utilized with ENL learners that are in the early emergent stage of reading. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time the programs that we have utilized will not be discontinued as we have seen positive gains in student progress in moving through the stages of acquiring language. Our percentages of students progressing across the 5 point ENL range from year to year, with the majority of fifth grade students exemplifying expanding and commanding language acquisition, are favorable and assure that programs that we are utilizing are supporting our students in acquiring language. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students participate in the same curriculum and programs throughout the school. Teachers support learners with varying means of accessibility to afford access into the curriculum. For example, within reading, students may have varying text levels in order to support students in being able to access the reading strategies and participate in independent reading. Across subject areas techniques, tools, and resources are available to support ENL learners with access into the curriculum. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology is used to provide students with access to books, vocabulary and interactive activities to support language acquisition. Visual aides including teacher made charts and tools are provided to support students with access into the learning. Programs such as Imagine Learning, I-Ready, and Reading Eggs are also utilized to support ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Within the ENL program model, technology supports are used to provide students with home language support. Teachers utilize varying technology tools, ie. google translate, to support students with home language. The school is seeking to purchase licenses for programs that allow students access to texts and materials within their home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school follows the Common Core Curriculum and has purchased curriculum that aligns to the Common Core Standards. When planning, teachers across grades and settings plan and deliver teaching within the curriculum that is appropriate to the age and grade of students. Therefore, all students are exposed to grade appropriate learning. The staff works to ensure the access of all students into this curriculum. Teachers pull small groups and work with students within 1-1 conferences in order to support students in participating and master grade appropriate curriculum. 6  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Technology is used to provide students with access to books, vocabulary and interactive activities to support language acquisition. Visual aides including teacher made charts and tools are provided to support students with access into the learning. Programs such as Imagine Learning, I-Ready, and Reading Eggs are also utilized to support ELLs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are invited to come to Open Doors with their parents to meet the Parent Coordinator and other parents of English Language Learners and engage in fun and academic activties. We continuallly offer workshops and programs throughout the school year for all students to attend facilitated by the Parent Coordinator, PTA and outside Community Based Organizations. The guidance counselor is always available to support ELLs in their transition to school. Buddies within the classroom are also assigned to students to support them with the transition into our school as well. ENL teachers provide support to students, parents and teachers throughout the year in many different ways. Supplemental materials, teacher resources, parent outreach, content area materials, differentiation techniques and small groups are a handful of ways ENL teachers provide that support. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ESL professional development support will be available to all personnel including all classroom teachers, out-of-classroom teachers, service providers and paraprofessionals. P.D. schedule includes meetings during Inquiry Team (weekly), grade conferences and faculty conferences (monthly); professional development on Election Day, Chancellor's Day and three paraprofessional workshops during the year. In addition, there will be twenty Teachers College staff development days, with ten sessions for upper grades and ten sessions for lower grades. These staff developers take into consideration our ELL population and provide strategies, scaffolds and support to our staff so our students can be successful. Teachers will also attend meetings outside of the building offered at Teacher's College and the Borough Field Support Center that are geared toward ENL learning. A major focus for professional development this year within PS 107 is in providing access and entry points for all students to the curriculum through targeted instruction and activities as aligned to student needs. ESL teachers support other personnel in this schoolwide focus by providing environmental and instructional support strategies in the form of visual aids, sharing strategies such as "juicy sentences," BICS/CALP wordplay and deconstruction/reconstruction of text, as well as scaffolding supports such as previewing text, pre-teaching content-specific vocabulary and the use of graphic organizers. ESL teachers attend various professional development training sessions throughout the year. This includes ELL 7  Liaison/Instructional Lead Meetings, and training provided by The Office of English Language Learners. These sessions are solely focused on engaging ELLs and providing access to the Common Core Learning Standards. Information and strategies learned from these workshops and trainings are then shared at P.S. 107's Instructional Lead meetings and regularly held grade meetings so teachers can learn and implement these ESL strategies and techniques. Professional Development is also provided from Teacher's College with specific strategies to support ENL learners with acquiring language and literacy skills. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers provide information to teachers and the guidance counselor who are creating articulation cards for graduating ELL students. Such information may include years of service, proficiency levels and personal teacher observations of the student. ENL teachers are also available to share information with guidance counselors and middle school personnel who make inquiries about P.S. 107 graduates coming to their schools. On Professional Development days, ESL teachers present strategies for teachers to use to support ELLs in their language acquisition and content area learning, for example conversation cards, decontruction/reconstruction of text, and use of graphic organizers. ESL teachers also present during lead teacher meetings, faculty conferences, grade meetings and Inquiry Team. ESL teachers attend Professional Development offered by the Office of ELLs, BFSC, and Teacher's College. Time is allocated for information to be turn-keyed to the building staff. Agendas and PD attendance records are available for professional learning within PS 107. Records of outside PD are maintained by the ESL teachers in the ESL department. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to meeting with parents at Parent Orientation and Parent-Teacher Conferences, on Tuesday extended day all teachers, including classroom and ENL teachers, invite parents of ELLS to meet individually with them during the allotted Parent Engagement time. During this time, acadamic progress, language development as well as tips and strategies to use at home are shared with parents. Translations are made available with the help of bilingual speakers in the building or through calls made to the Translation Hotline. Translated notes are sent home to parents to invite them to meet with teachers or to discuss progress over the phone, via email or through notes. Multiple attempts at parent outreach are made to ensure teachers meet with parents of ELLs to discuss their child's progress. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2. Each teacher maintains their own records for annual individual meetings with ELL parents and the outreach steps taken to ensure their specific needs are met. Meetings and outreach occurs in many different ways according to parent preference (email, phone calls, in-person meetings and notes home). 3. The P.S. 107 school community enjoys a high level of parent involvement. Our school is a welcoming environment for students, families and visitors. Our PTA enjoys a large and committed membership who contribute their time and energy to many projects that benefit our school and school community. The PTA board is a microcosm of our school in diversity of culture and language. Our school lobby has a P.S. 107 Family bulletin board covered with photographs of our children and families participating in our many parent involvement activities. Our Parent Coordinator creates, organizes and facilitates many opportunities for parent and family involvement in the way of day- and night-time workshops. Some of the workshops held at P.S. 107 are GO Math, Open Doors ELL (parents & children workshops), Bullying Prevention, Preparing for New York 8  State tests, Family Craft Nights, Effective Parent-Teacher Conferences, Movie Night, Candyland, Adult Book Club, Parent and Child Book Club. P.S. 107 also holds workshops on Saturdays, such as Daddy and Me, Build-A-Kite, and Family Fun Morning. We also make two family Sunday trips per year, one to a Broadway show and another to a New York City venue such as Radio City or Madison Square Garden theater. This year, P.S. 107 has applied for a theater grant from the Center for Arts Education: Parents as Arts Partners, specifically for Kindergarten ELLs with the goal of increasing language and vocabulary, and building community. We will also be applying for the Ezra Jack Keats mini-grant to support our ELL families. ELL parents participate in school activities because P.S. 107 does not let language act as a barrier to a full and representative community. Parent notices go home in the parents' preferred home language and bilingual staff are available throughout the day as well as at night-time workshops to assist ELL families. At P.S. 107, communication between school and all parents is full, open and ongoing. Our staff and parents keep in touch in many ways: the school's all-call messenger system (Blackboard Connect), appointments, conferences, email, telephone meetings, classroom newsletters and the school bulletin Guidepost. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lori Cummings, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 107 School DBN: 25Q107 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lori Cummings Title Principal Sara Cangelosi Assistant Principal Ourania Malandrakis Parent Coordinator Xiaoriu Chen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Emalyn Santiago Parent Priscilia Phang/ ESL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Natasa Mijatovic/ IEP Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nora Tomei School Counselor Danielle DiMango Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q107 School Name: Thomas Dooley Schoo Superintendent: Danielle DiMang The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We utilize the Home Language Identification Survey during the registration process. At that time, we determine not only the child’s language but also the preferred language of communication of the parent which may be different than the child's. These preferences are captured in ATS. ESL teachers also keep records of parents' preferred language of communication both written and oral, and we share this information with Parent Coordinator (LAC) and others. We utilize this information throughout the school year to ensure optimal written and oral communication between school and parents. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language As per the Home Language Identification Survey and information gathered in ATS, parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication include: English, Chinese, Korean, Spanish, Arabic, Italian, Russian, Greek, Pashtu, Hindi, Punjabi and Urdu. Most of our parents speak, read and write English, Chinese, Korean and Spanish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All information distributed regarding safety and reminders sent on behalf of the Department of Education are sent home in translated versions. Vital documents such as report cards, emergency blue cards, school lunch forms, school discipline code, Respect for All and Gifted and Talented applications are provided in translated versions at the beginning of the school year. Additionally, throughout the school year the parent coordinator sends school announcements regarding 3  events and/or important information that the school is sharing via an all call system that the school has purchased in English and then translated and messaged in the languages that are appropriate to the families within our school. Due to our highly divserse and multilingual staff, we are able to provide in-house translations of letters and documents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Face-to-face meetings at our school inclue Parent-Teacher Conferences on November 5 and March 3, Meet the Teacher on September 17 and May 12, monthly Curriculum Workshops which started September 30, Open School Week November 16. Other interactions include Stop and Chat outside school at arrival and dismissal, Parent Engagement every Tuesday afternoon, unscheduled calls from Guidance and Attendance as needed. Our school utilizes Blackboard Connect to disseminate phone messages to all parents in their preferred languages. Our many multilingual staff members assist by recording the messages that go out in these all-calls. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 4  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Welcome poster is displayed prominently in our lobby. The Language ID Guide is posted at the security desk and in the office. The Parents' Bill of Rights is sent home in the preferred language. The Parents' Guide to Language Access is scanned and emailed to all parents by the PC/LAC. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We utilize the parent survey, Stop and Chat and all available data to gather feedback and improve parent engagement. 5 
