 29Q135 School Name: THE BELLAIRE SCHOOL Principal: DIANA LAGNESE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Bellaire School 342900010135 Pre K-5 School Number (DBN): 29Q135 207 – 11 89 th Avenue, Queens Village, NY 11427 718-464-2119 718-464-8448 Phone Number: Fax: Diana Lagnese Dlagnese@ school.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Diana Lagnese ShantaeJones JulissaParra Kathleen Rivera Leo Cabrera N/A N/A NA District Information Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Beverly Mitchell Superintendent: 90-11 191 Street, RM 122 | Hollis, NY 11423 bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 217-7740 Ext 1223 (718)-217-7739 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 90-11 191 Street, RM 122 | Hollis, NY 11423 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: (718)642-5705 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Diana Lagnese ShantaeJones JulissaParra Justine Shishkoff Karen Greenfield Kathleen Rivera *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher Teacher Teacher/Chairperson   Luz Praimras Leo Cabrera Jason Phang BharatSingh Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission is to provide each student with a supportive, safe and nurturing learning environment that will foster creative and independent thinkers who will reflect on their own learning. Through a rigorous curriculum each student will be equipped with the skills they need to reach their fullest potential as they achieve their personal and academic goals. With a strong diverse community, students will understand one another and embrace all the wonderful things around them as they become a confident, passionate, motivated lifelong learner.   The motto of P.S. 135 is “The school that C.A.R.E.S.!” Your child will know that every staff member C.A.R.E.S. about them by instilling the following: Confident, passionate, motivated lifelong learners Achieve their personal and academic goals Reflective of their learning Equip each student with the skills to reach their fullest potential Supportive, safe and nurturing learning environment that fosters independent thinking 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 135Q services 1,034 students from grades pre-k through 5. more than 71% of our student body is eligible for free lunch. Our student demographic at P.S. 135Q is 38% Asian, 32% Black, 18% Hispanic, and 3% White. Among the student demographic we have 14% ELLs and 17% SWD. The Bellaire School provides students with academic, emotional and physical support. We are committed to academic interventions and to providing quality instruction for all students in a safe and nurturing environment. We will provide the following academic programs to help support children:  AIS Students - Before/after-school programs provide students with extra help in ELA and math.   ENL Students - Reading and Writing support via Imagine Learning Saturday Academy - Struggling learners for 4th and 5th grade Level 1 students. We also partnered up with Legacy, an after-school program, that provides families with academic support. The Bellaire School will continue to offer a morning Basketball Program to engage students with physical education activities and Music sessions for students to learn how to play various instruments. We also provided emotional support to students by participating in programs such as No Place for Hate (NPFH) and the Dove campaign to help build self-esteem among students. We are firm believers that students need the arts in their education. We have a full-time Art and Music teacher which allows students to have a rich visual art and music experience. The music program provides students with choir and instrument instruction. We are adding a Full-Time STEAM position and a Full-Time Character Education position. We have also applied for grant monies for the Cultural After-School Adventures program and the Arts for ENL and SWD grant. The two grant proposals will help provide three resident artists to provide dance instruction and visual arts instruction to various grade levels. Parent engagement is a critical component of building a collaborative school culture. We include the parents' voice through a multitude of paths which includes: Check-in sessions with the PTA President, data from the Parent Coordinator, SLT meetings, school events, fundraising activities, parent volunteers and direct parent feedback. Parents are encouraged to attend their children's success at P.S. 135 by attending events such as celebrating during the monthly writing celebrations, student of the month award nights, Living Wax Museums, Poetry Café, Mother Day 0  Celebrations, visual art displays at the Queens Museum, Movie Night, Pre-K Crafting, STEM nights, Art Expos, father-daughter dance, mother-son dance and Family Math Game Night. Our Instructional Focus is teachers will use student data to engage all students in their learning by meeting each child at their level through differentiation of instruction. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 135Q services 1,034 students from grades Pre-K through 5. More than 71% of our student body is eligible for free lunch. Asian: 38% | Black: 30% | Hispanic: 19% | White: 4% Student with Special Needs: 16% English Language Learners: 12%. The SWD population have a wide range of needs within our school and they range from students with severe vision conditions to students who are labeled as emotionally disturbed. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Effective school leadership is something that has been very successful. Administrators lead by example at P.S. 135Q. The administration is working on building leaders within the school. Teachers are encouraged to attend Professional Development and then turn key the information to their colleagues. There is an open door policy for staff, parents, and students, the administration has an open ear for the staffs' day-to-day issues, and an open heart to care for and nurture the students. Administrators make time to speak to students, and follow up after any issues that may arise over the course of the day. The area of focus for next year will be providing rigorous instruction and collaborative teacher teams. This year, teachers have begun working together on curriculum maps, pacing calendars and lesson plans for each grade. We have also successfully implemented a school-wide data analysis protocol during the 2015-2016 academic year and we would like to provide feedback and improve the data protocol process during the 2017-2018 academic year. During the data protocol process, teachers will be discussing ways of improving their pedagogical skills, modifying lesson plans, reviewing student work and developing goals. Professional development (PD) has also seen a transformation. In order to make PD more relevant and useful to teachers, PD will be planned by analyzing data trends across the school and providing staff members the tools they need to improve their practice. Our Instructional Focus is student engagement within instruction. With the new reading program Wonders, TC Writing, and GoMath, all students will be taught at various entry points. This will ensure that students engage within each lesson. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q135 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 989 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 75 70 38 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 38 38 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 57.0% % Attendance Rate 55.4% % Reduced Lunch 13.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 11.7% % Black or African American 18.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.5 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 43.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES YES N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YES YES N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 71 70 38 93.1% 1.0% 15.4% 27.7% 34.8% 14.5% 6 0% 7.4 39.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES N/A YSH NO NO NO N/A NO NO YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School Quality Guide, for the past three years we have noticed a decline in the math early grade progress. 41 % in 2016 and 37% in 2017. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase the performance index for SWD and ENL students in grades 3-5 by 5% as measured by New York State Mathematics Exam. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will use the GO Math curriculum with pre, mid, and post assessments to modify curriculum to ensure that instruction has scaffolds for all learners, is engaging, and aligned to the CCLS. K-5 Pre: Sept. 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Mid: January Classroom Teachers, 2019 AIS Providers, Post: June 2019 Paraprofessionals, SETSS Provider Math Professional Development during Monday afternoons for K-5 teachers, special education teachers, and ENL teachers. These workshops will include: use of manipulatives, use of Math Vocabulary within Mathematical discussions, Word Problem strategies (CUB or CUBE method) and spiral work with Math Journals ( extended response) K-5 September 2018 November 2018 Monitoring System: GO Math Unit assessment spreadsheets and iReady assessments. Principal, Assistant Principals,Classroom Teachers, AIS Providers, Paraprofessionals, SETSS Provider January 2019 March 2019 May 2019 Teachers will develop workshops during the Tuesday Parent Involvement that will support parents with understanding the CCLS in math, and how to support their children at home. Teachers will conduct workshops on upcoming units and multi step word problems. K-5 Nov. 2018 Feb. 2019 Monitoring System: PD Committee and AP Mir will create a PD Matrix to align with school/principal goals. Principal, Assistant Principals,Classroom Teachers, AIS Providers, Paraprofessionals, SETSS Provider 4 After-school Skill Based Math Program for grades 2, 3, 4, and 5 twice a week on Wed and Thurs from 2:30pm to 3:30pm based off of their assessment data. Use of Imagine Math and differentiation of instruction will be used K-5 Each grade will select a Math facilitator to ensure the implementation of data analysis based off of unit assessments and the use of the cub/cube method. Vertical math teams will meet bi-monthly to discuss trends. Grade 5 will departmentalize core subject areas with content specific teachers and a traveling special education teacher. K-5 May 2019 October 2018 - May 2019 October 2018 December 2018 Feb 2019 April 2019 June 2019 Principal, Designated Assistant Principal, Classroom Teachers, Special Education Teachers Monitoring System: iReady Assessments Principal, Assistant Principals, Classroom Teachers, Special Education providers Monitoring System: Completion of data action sheets 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be conducted at various times throughout the year to keep parents involved and informed. The 2018-2019 school year will begin with a Meet the Teacher night during the month of September, followed by Parent Teacher Conferences in November, March and May. Monthly math meetings will be facilitated by math grade facilitators to expose families to the CCLS and shifts within the curriculum with a problem solving focus. Parent newsletters will be created by departmental teams to inform families of grade specific instruction. ENL staff will conduct parent workshops. Staff led parent workshops will focus on rigorous instruction, college and career readiness and home help. Principal will be responsible for achieving the goal(s) and desigated Assistant Principals will be responsible to ensure all of the specific events/tasks are completed with accuracy and integrity. Teachers will conduct workshops on upcoming units and multi step word problems. These workshops will include the parent and the child working together with mathematical vocabulary, problem solving strategies and concrete concepts to explore Real World Problems. 5  Teachers will develop workshops during the Tuesday Parent Involvement that will support parents with understanding the CCLS in math, and how to support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administrators, Teachers, Parents, Students, Parent Coordinator, Paraprofessionals ● Schedule for AIS intervention ● Data from all formative and summative assessments ● Go Math Curriculum ● Math RTI and Assessment Creation Professional Development ● After School programs including Imagine Math Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 100% of the students will complete the iReady diagnostic by October 31, 2018. 75% of the teachers will created differentiated activties by October 1, 2018. 75% of the students will complete the iReady differentiated iReady lessons by November 30, 2018. 100% of the students will complete the iReady differentiated iReady lessons by February 1, 2018. 100% of the teachers will be observed and given feedback starting October 1, 2018 and ending May 1, 2019. 100% of the teachers will meet in grade teams by October 1, 2018 to analyze data, modify lessons and student activities. 100% of the students will compelete the iReady diagnostic by June 1, 2019. The parent coordinator will execute 50% of the projected parent workshops by December 1, 2018. The parent coordinator will execute 100% of the parent workshops by May 1, 2019. 50% of the Professional Development courses will be scheduled by the PD committee by November 1, 2018 100% of the Professsional Development courses will be scheduled by the PD committee by January 2, 2019. 6  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) iReady data from the assessments and the amount hours students spent on iReady account. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In 2016-17 school year has shown that there have been a total of 205 Level 3 and 4 infractions entered into OORS infraction reporting system. Most of these disciplinary infractions are during lunch/recess. For year 2017-18 there were 222 Level 3 and 4 infractions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific: These programs will include all the MTSS systems that were established during the 2016-17 academic year. Within this program, each month we will focus on a new character trait and build upon last years traits. Measurable: This will help us increase the Supportive Environment values by 5% for the 2018-2019 academic year (from 79% to 84%. The 94% is the city average). We will discuss the OORS reports every two months at the Behavioral Committee and Cabinet to monitor next steps. Achievable: 100% of the teachers and staff will implement the Stanford Harmony and Cloud Nine character education program along with Brain Power. Grades 3-5 will continue their work with Restorative Circles. Relevant: Administration, Guidance Counselor, Behavior and Spirit Committee, School Aides, and Student Council will monitor OORS reports every two months. Time-Bound: October, December, Feb., April and June. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? RIT/Positive Behavioral Committee (MTSS) and the Spirit Team will meet every other month to discuss data and modify action plans. Pre-K to 5 October 2018 All staff and Students The Behavioral Team, Guidance Counselor, and Administrative Team continue to will provide Cloud Nine Training, Stanford Harmony, and Restorative Circle Training throughout the year. Brain Power will be introduced and Professional Development will be provided throughout the year. Cloud Nine monthly themed read alouds along with connection lessons will be implemented into the Flow of the Day. Through Cloud Nine, each month there will be an assigned task assigned to students associated with the Cloud Nine Character Books. Dec. 2018 Feb. 2019 April 2019 June2019 Sept 2018 Dec. 2018 March 2019 Pre-K to 5 Sept. 7th All Staff and Students Oct. 2nd Nov. 1st Dec. 1st Jan. 2nd Feb. 1st March 1st 9  April 9th May 1st June 1st Parent Workshops: De-escalation,Conflict Resolution, Cloud Nine and Restorative Circles. These workshops will provide the parents with information and support parents at homes. Pre-K to 5 Sept 2018 Parent Coordinator parents Dec. 2018 Teachers March 2019 Administration In addition, each month a teacher will select a student to receive the Character of the Month Award. This award will be given to the student at the Student of the Month Award ceremony. Parents Sept. 28th Students Oct. 26th Nov. 30th Dec. 21nd Jan. 31st Feb. 28th March 29th April 30th May 31st June 22nd De-Escalation training for all staff members that work with Students With Disabilities. Pre-K to 5 Sept. 2018 All teachers Mental Health Professional Development: Mrs. Pharra Hired a Recess Coach to assist with Lunch Time Engagment Porfessional Development for all Staff Members and Students for Brain Power Administration All Staff and Students Nov. 2018 All year Guidance Counselor and Grade Five Students Staff Members Every Thursday for the 2018-2019 school year from 0 Crisis Team meets weekly to discuss and create Action Plans for At -risk Students. 9am to 10am 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops: De-escalation,Conflict Resolution, Cloud Nine and Restorative Circles. These workshops will provide the parents with a common language and skill set to implement the same program at home. September and October: Cloud Nine and De-escalation workshop: Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator November and December: Stanford Harmony and Cyber Bullying: Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator January and Feb.: Social and Emotional needs of children: Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator March and April: Resortive Circles: Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator May and June: Anti-bullying:Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration, teachers, Parent Coordinator, Students, School Aides, MTSS Committee, Guidance Counselor Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Specific: These programs will include all the MTSS systems that were established during the 2016-17 academic year. Within this program, each month we will focus on a new character trait Measurable: This will help us increase the Supportive Environment values by 5% for the 2018-2019 academic year (from 79% to 84%. The 94% is the city average). We will discuss the OORS reports every two months at the Behavioral Committee and Cabinet to monitor next steps. Achievable: 100% of the teachers and staff will implement the Stanford Harmony and Cloud Nine character education program. Along with Brain Power, Relevant: The Character Education Cluster Teacher, Guidance Counselor, Behavior and Spirit Committee, Administration Team and Student Council will monitor “PAWS” and OORS reports every two months. 1  Time-Bound: October, December, Feb., April and June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS data, Cloud Nine lessons, student participation within Restorative Circles Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2016-17 school year, Public School 135 implemented phases 1 and 2 of the data analysis protocol (Grade 4 specifically). The school provided teachers with professional development on how to: Phase 1: Unpacking standards and understanding the assessment question associated with the standard. Phase 2: Analyzing Data – Results Meeting Protocol The school will focus on implementing phases 3 which is data conversations and creating actionable steps to improving lesson plans and curriculum maps. Phase 3:Due to the discrepancies between the unit Go Math math scores and the New York State Math assessment scores, we will continue to develop the use of common assessments to measure student progress toward goals across the grade. Through the use of these assessments, teachers will collaborate and adjust the curriculum and instruction based on student needs. Therefore, we need to strengthen our collaboration school-wide, conduct inter-visitations cycles and build capacity through the lens of differentiation of instruction based on student data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific: By January 2019, 100% of the teacher will modify their lessons and annotate changes on the curriculum maps to show changes to their instruction based on data and this will include any re-teach days for whole class, small group or individual student(s). Measurable: After each task or assessment, the teachers will partake in a data conversation and modify the upcoming unit. Achievable: teacher will modify their lessons and annotate changes on the curriculum maps to show changes to their instruction based on data and this will include any re-teach days for whole class, small group or individual student(s). Relevant:By January 2019, 100% of the teachers will be trained and will implement data conversations for grades K-5. 3  Time-Bound:October, Monday PD for the teachers on the data protocol January: Monday Data analysis time, Feb.Monday Data analysis time, March Monday Data analysis time, April Monday Data analysis time, May Monday Data analysis time and June Monday Data analysis time. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will implement focused learning rounds bi-month through a lens for assessment. Pre-K-5 Oct 2018 Administrators, Vertical Team will meet quarterly to discuss gaps in curriculum from grade to grade and seek out additional instructional resources to supplement and scaffold the curriculum for all of our learners. Dec 2018 Classroom Teachers, Feb. 2019 April 2019 Paraprofessionals, ESL Teachers, SETSS Provider Pre-K-5 Dec 2018 Administrators, Feb. 2019 Classroom Teachers, April 2019 June 2019 Paraprofessionals, ESL Teachers, SETSS Provider School Leaders will monitor and provide feedback for grade team meetings and for data protocol meetings. Pre-K-5 Oct. 30th Administrators, Nov. 27 Dec. 18 Jan.29 Feb. 26 March 26 April 30 May 21 June 25 October 2018 Classroom Teachers, and Paraprofessionals. Administrators, Classroom Teachers, 2016-2017 Academic Year: The school piloted the various data phases with only grade 4. In 2017-2018 the school used the 4th grade as a model to turnkey phases 1 and 2 for other grades. In 2018-19 the school will use point people to continue the work on Pre-K-5 5 each grade. These point people will be on the Vertical Teams as well. Paraprofessionals, SETSS Provider 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  During the Parent Engagement Time on the Tuesday afternoons, parents can request a meeting with their child's teachers.  Teachers will provide PDs for the parents on various topics throughout the year.  Monthly Open House Dates for Kindergarten and Pre-K.  Teacher reports as needed.  Once a month events (Math Night, STEAM, ELA Strategies Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administrators, Teachers, Paraprofessionals ● The use of data protocol to look at student work ● Common Planning Time ● Monday, Professional Development (2:30-3:45 pm monthly) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, 100% of the teacher will modify their lessons and annotate changes on the curriculum maps to show changes to their instruction based on data and this will include any re-teach days for whole class, small group or individual student(s). Specific: In order to monitor students' progress the school will administer 4 mathematics interim-assessments. The tentative dates of the assessments are: 1. BOY: September 2018 2. 2nd Interim-Assessment - January 31, 2019 3. 3rd Interim-Assessment - March 30, 2019 4. EOY: June 4, 2019 6  Measurable: 100% of the teachers will annotate and will be on pace to cover all of the necessary/applicable mathematical skills are covered before the math test date and after the math test date. Achievable: School administrators will meet with data teams and provide feedback (post-IA assessment and post-unit assessment) on key data trends on and across grade levels. Relevant: The close alignment between assessment and instruction will yield an increase of 5% in their math standardized scores. Time-Bound: 4 cycles of observation visits (Oct-Nov, Dec-Jan, Feb- March, April-May) Starting October 1st the school will schedule a monthly inter-visitation/lab site to increase teacher performance in Danielson’s Domain 3 by 25%. We will use the Advance Dashboard system to determine areas of need within Domain 3 and restructure the schedule and teachers participating Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Use of Danielson Dashboard data and completion of pacing calendars for each unit, annotations on curriculum maps and lesson plans, conference notes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After analyzing 2017-2018 Advance data for instruction (domain3) the data showed an area of need in engaging students in their learning (3D) The data for component 3D showed an average rating of 2.8 out of 4.0 values. 44% Percent of our students are at proficiency level in ELA and 40% of our students are at proficiency level in mathematics. Historically our students' proficiency levels increased from 40% - 44% in ELA and from 36% - 40% in mathematics (Data from 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 NYS ELA/Math assessments). Since we are using iReady assessments for the first time; those data sets are not yet available. The instructional report indicates that our 3rd grade students in need the most support in ELA and our 4th grade students need the most support in Mathematics. Assessment is directly connected with student achievement as it indicates whether a student understood or master a concept. Some components from 3D that are directly connected with planning are: creating plans for students to make sure that students are intellectually engaged, learning activities that are aligned with an instructional outcome, students are invited to assess their own work and make improvements and feedback includes specific and timely guidance. The data sources that indicate a need to improve planning and consequently student engagement are: * Advance reports * New York State Examination Instructional Reports * New York State Examination proficiency rate (less than 45% proficient in ELA and Mathematics) * Informal data sets from observations * Teacher debrief sessions * Teacher feedback from professional development committee * Student mathematics unit assessments Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 8  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of school leaders' implementation of targeted cycles of observation, feedback, and professional support, focused on Using Assessment in Instruction, at least 80% of all teachers will receive end of year MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in component 3d, as measured by end of year 2018-2019 Advance ratings. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers will receive actionable feedback at least four times this year from the administrative team on how to best move their practice toward an effective rating in this component. Pre-K - 5 Inter-visitations and Learning Rounds cycles will be conducted four times with the focus on student assessment. Pre-K - 5 Assistant Principals and teachers will provide professional development on Monday afternoons around Danielson component 3D. Pre-K - 5 Some topics: 1. Analyzing student work 2. Providing tiered intervention in the classroom Teachers, Assistant Principals, and Principal Teachers, Assistant Principals, and Principal Teachers, Literacy Specialist, Assistant Principals, and Principal Starts October 1, 2018 and ends May 1, 2019. Four cycles (Oct-Nov.) Dec-Jan) (Feb-March) April-May) Starts October 1, 2018 and ends May 1, 2019. Four cycles (Oct-Nov.) Dec-Jan) (Feb-March) April-May) Initial Plan will start September 17, 2018 and end June 10, 2019 Dec. 2018 0  3. Creating kid friendly rubric, reviewing rubric with students and teaching students how to self-assess. 4. Student led conferences. 5. Data analysis and how to modify instruction based on data. 6. Providing students with bite size feedback. Some components from 3D that are directly connected with planning are: creating plans to make sure all students (including SWD and ENL) are intellectually engaged, learning activities that are aligned with an instructional outcome, students are invited to assess their own work and make improvements and feedback includes specific and timely guidance. K-5 Students will completed iReady lessons based on their feedback. Feb. 2019 April 2019 These meetings will October 1, 2018 and end June 24, 2018. Monthly Data Meetings. All staff and Administration Teachers will check student progress in iReady ELA and Mathematics on a bi-weekly basis. Specific: By June 2019, 80% of the teachers will move one level on the Danielson Framework for using assessment in instruction (3D) by implementing specific observation feedback, actively including an assessment component into the lesson plan, lab sites, and data meeting protocol. Measurable: Advance Dashboard System in Feb. June 2019: Summative evaluations and review of professional goals Ongoing - Observation feedback and student achievement scores. (i.e. Math unit assessment scores, math interim-assessment scores, data protocol meeting outcomes) Achievable: School administrators will meet with teachers and provide feedback Relevant:The close alignment between assessment and instruction will yield an increase of 5% in their math standardized scores. Actionable feedback for every formal/informal observation will be given in person (one-on-one) and will focus 1  on best practices for assessing student learning, when needed. Weekly cabinet meetings will discuss the individual resources and needs for each teacher. Time Bound: September 2018: Initial planning conferences with teachers to discuss professional goals and school goal. September 2018 – June 2019: Quarterly Learning Rounds September 2018: Provide PD for Danielson 3D provided by Assistant Principals, Teachers and Inter-visitation February 2019: We will use the Advance Report to target the teachers that will need more support through inter-visitation/lab-sites. June 2019: Summative evaluations and review of professional goals Ongoing - Observation feedback and student achievement scores. (i.e. Math unit assessment scores, math interim-assessment scores, data protocol meeting outcomes) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration and Teachers will convey student achievement via Report card grades, student-led conferences, Remind Application, Class DoJo, informal/formal meetings and parent-teacher conferences. November, March and June. The district also received a grant from SchoolCNXT to update parents on student progress, school events, etc. The school will maintain an open door policy to hear all parents concerns and to work with the community in giving community members accurate and timely information. The school leader will continue to meet with the school leadership team to discuss spending plans, services/workshops/programs for students and parents. In addition, the school will form partnership with Marquis Studios to celebrate the cultural diversity of the community ending with a culuminating dance performance. Ms.. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to meet our goal we have created a professional development plan. Based on the UFT Contract, Monday afternoons will be professional development for teachers. In collaboration with the Talent Coach and PD committee, 2  we are providing teachers with professional development around Danielson, specifically 3D. Part of this professional development plan will consist of inter-visitations, and Learning Rounds. Actionable feedback for every formal/informal observation will be given in person (one-on-one) and will focus on best practices for assessing student learning, when needed. Weekly cabinet meetings will discuss the individual resources and needs for each teacher. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of school leaders' implementation of targeted cycles of observation, feedback, and professional support, focused on Using Assessment in Instruction, at least 80% of all teachers will receive at least 2 MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in component 3d, as measured by Advance observation reports between September 2018 to February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Observation Dashboard and Danielson Framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2017-2018 parent attendance rates indicate the need for increasing parent involvement in workshops, school programs and events. On average, 10% of our families participate in workshops and school programs, as evidenced by attendance sheets. We will increase this participation by 5%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Specific: By June 2019, P.S. 135 will increase parent engagement pertaining to during and after school activities by 5% as compared to the 2017-2018 attendance rate for workshops and programs Measurable: All of the Parent Engagement and Professional Development Activities will be offered in the morning, afternoon and evening times. The data will be compared and use of time will be strategically placed where we have the most attendance. Achievable: We will offer activities at various time intervals to allow flexibility for parents to attend. We will translate all invitations in languages that are representative of our school population and involve parents in needs assessment surveys.We will increase the frequency of our activities from once a year to twice a year. Time-Bound: We will offer activities at various time intervals to allow flexibility for parents to attend. We will translate all invitations in languages that are representative of our school population and involve parents in needs assessment surveys.We will increase the frequency of our activities from once a year to twice a year. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To help with increasing parent engagement and participation within the school community, the following events will take place: STEAM Night, Family Math Game Night, Music Concert, Physical Education Family Game Nights, Art Expo, Science Fair, Literacy Night, Parent Outreach Computer Lab will be open with support for translation during Spring Parent Teacher Conference Spring Parent Teacher Conference translation support Workshops on the importance of the completion of the Parent Survey Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Pre K-5 Nov 2018 Administrators, Dec. 2018 Teachers, Feb. 2019 Paraprofessionals, March 2019 Parents April 2019 Parent Coordinator May 2019 Translators June 2019 March - April 2019 Family Outreach Pre-K - k Sept. 5th Administrators, Monthly Pre-K and Kindergarten open houses Oct. 31 Teachers, Nov. 20 Paraprofessionals, Dec. 18 Parents, Students Parent Coordinator Newsletter Jan. 25 Parent Coordinator Translated invitations and memos- translators at events Parent Coordinator Phone Relay-School Messenger Mar. 22 Apr. 30 5 May. 15 School Web page and email blasts Student Celebrations, Student of the Month Awards, Award Assemblies, Character Trait Award (monthly) Academic Acknowledgments-Science Fair, Writing Celebrations ELL and SWD Outreach and Support Pre-K - 5 Sept. 17 Administrators, Early detection of speech intervention, OT, PT, and other support services to June 18 Teachers, PS 135 formed a Parent Engagement Committee Pre K - 5 Sept. 17 to June 18 Team will meet to plan Parent Engagement Time and Family Nights Paraprofessionals, Parents Parent Coordinator Administrators, Teachers, Paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, Parent Coordinator, and support staff will help with the workshops. The incentives will be donations which will be raffled off. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid point benchmark in Feb that will indicate the schools progress toward meeting a 5% increase in parent engagement pertaining to during and after school activities will be as follows: Attendance for Parent Workshops for different time frames will be compared to each other Attendance for PTA meetings conducted at different time frames Other data sources are: Tracking of parent survey completion (March-April) and then the final completion rate for parent survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Attendance Sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, before and after school Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Formal assessments Summative assessments Teacher recommendation MoSL TC Benchmarks ELA Pillars Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, one-to-one At-risk SETSS Strategy Groups One-on-one conference AIS Support for Reading and Writing Fundations Program K-2 (Double Dose) After School Program for ELLs 2-5 After School Program 2-3 PPT Discussions Tier 1 data collection F-Status Teacher grade 4 and 5 Mathematics Formal assessments Strategy Groups Small group, one-to-one During the school day Summative assessments One-on-one conference Teacher recommendation After School Program 2-5 Before and after school 8  At-risk SETSS-Math PPT Discussions AIS Support for Math Tier 1 Data Collection Revised: Morning Program Grade 3 Science Formal assessments Summative assessments Teacher recommendation Formal assessments Summative assessments Teacher recommendation Formal assessments Summative assessments Teacher recommendation Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Scaffolding instruction based on students’ needs Small group instruction During the day Scaffolding instruction based on students’ needs Small group instruction During the day Guidance Counselor – Positive Social Skills Small group, one-to-one During the day School Psychologist- Positive reinforcement One-to-one As needed Teacher Observations Social Worker- Positive Social Skills 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 8 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies, books, after school programs, counseling , social worker support and trips Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies and activities used to attract high-quality highly qualified teachers to our school include. ● Frequent communication with our HR Director when vacancies occur. ● Establishing a rigorous interview protocol that includes intensive criteria for the selection of new staff members. ● Maintaining a teacher resource center and professional library to promote promising and effective practices. ● Individualized PD plans are created for teachers to ensure continued improvement. ● Teachers are encouraged to participate in Lunch and Learns, inter-visitation and attend off site PD. ● First year teachers will receive a Mentor Teacher to assist them as required. For our new teachers to the building, a Buddy Teacher will be assigned on the grade to assist them as required. These teams will have a specific schedule to meet one period a week. ● Principal and Assistant Principals will work closely and analyze the Advance Data and discuss the specific feedback given to teachers to determine PD on Mondays. ● Principal and Assistant Principals will ensure to conduct workshops tailored to the needs of the school whiling building capacity from within based off of Teacher Surveys and classroom observation data. ● Assistant Principals will host workshops on how to apply for their professional license and complete necessary paperwork. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2  ● Paraprofessionals will attend outside professional development on working with students with special needs. They will turnkey the information during Monday Professional Development time. ● IEP coordinator will provide four workshops on how to scaffold lessons for students with special needs. ● Teachers or Administration will supply weekly professional development in different areas such as, The Danielson rubric, Quality Review, managing student behavior strategies, and best practices. ● All K-5 and support teachers will attend workshops to support implementation of the TC Writing and Wonders Program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). P.S.135Q engages parents by hosting "Getting Ready for Kindergarten" parent orientation, family tours of the Kindergarten team/classroom/facilities, newsletters and workshops on Kindergarten curriculum. Teachers administer the ESI-R assessment as well as Teaching Strategies Gold assessment. Early intervention services referral are determined based on the aforementioned assessments. Classroom teachers, Social Worker and other staff member connect with parents to determine if any necessary interventions are necessary. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. We will provide faculty with professional development that explains the correlation between standards and assessment questions. One of the by products of this professional development is that it will empower teachers to be more selective around the types of questions to select when assessing various skills. This professional development will also empower teachers to plan "backwards." This will in turn yield to be useful when determining which lessons or 3  series of lessons to execute so that that the various standards are mastered by students. The Administrative Team will provide the teachers with interim-assessment/predictive assessment to teachers ahead of time so that they can critique and provide feedback on any potential changes to the assessment. Faculty members will also be trained on how to analyze an item analysis report to determine what to reteach and to whom to reteach various skills that were not mastered. The item analysis report will be created and compiled in a manner that is teacher/user friendly thereby reducing the amount of time spent on grading or figuring out what needs to be re-taught to students at a whole class, small group or individual level. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 437,944 83,672 17,486 6,386 9,792,176 X X x X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D 5B 5A, 5C, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to 4  combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy PS 135 Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S 135 The Bellaire School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will elect a Title I Committee. This committee meets and conducts an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design activities and programs to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and students. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; 6  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee.  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, School Quality Guide, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    7  Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Events and Open Houses;   hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children, parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress (as needed);  web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 135 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 8  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand;  providing parents with timely information regarding child's portfolio and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent handbook are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member.  planning activities for parents during the school year Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 9   monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives at school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promoting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 0  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Since virtually all the ELLs in third, fourth and fifth grade are required to take the NYS Mathematics and ELA examinations, these students will be brought in for an after school program centered around mathematics and literacy. These focused programs will address the student's specific areas of mathematics and literacy needs. The targeted students are from all proficiency levels and all sub-groups of ELLs. The students were selected based on the NYSESLAT Spring 2018 results, the results of the Spring 2018 NYS Mathematics and ELA exams as well as classroom and interim/periodic assessments. Students in Kindergarten, First and Second Grades will be invited to participate in a before school program. Phonemic awareness, reading and writing skills will be reinforced to facilitate classroom readiness in all subject areas. Parents will be notified about their child's participation and informed about this program in their home language. A permission slip will be attached to the letter and a student roster will be created. Student attendance rosters will be maintained weekly by teachers and kept in the main office. This supplemental after-school program will be 39 instructional sessions, of one hour and fifteen minutes long. These programs will begin on October 3, 2018 and end on February 28, 2019 and will be operational on the following dates. • October: 3, 4, 10, 11, 17, 18, 24, 25, 31 • November: 7, 8, 14, 15, 21, 28, 29 • December: 5, 6, 12, 13, 19, 20 • January: 2, 3, 9, 10, 16, 17, 23, 24, 30, 31 • February: 6, 7, 13, 14, 27, 28 The certified ENL teachers in these programs will use Imagine Learning and Imagine Math to reinforce the concepts taught during the day. Additional materials such as glossaries and various test prep materials will be used to further provide support and make certain the students become comfortable using them in preparation for the NYS examinations. The students will be grouped by grade level in order to address the grade level needs dictated by the mathematics curriculum and ENL/ELA standards. Each group will be taught by a certified ENL teacher. The supplemental Title III programs are operational on the days listed above. A supervisor will be paid at principal per-session rate for the duration of the program to oversee and monitor the delivery of instruction. A secretary will also be hired as a support staff to process payroll, maintain attendance records and contact parents of absent students. These two positions will be funded through other means and work at no cost to the Title III program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Ongoing Professional Development will be provided to teachers working with the Title III program in order to ensure that student language needs are being met. Teachers will receive support on how to implement strategies to help students. All teachers working with the Title III program, the ENL Department, classroom teachers working with ELLS, and the ELL supervisor will attend professional development workshops on the use of Imagine Math. In 2 one hour workshop sessions ENL teachers will collaborate with representatives from Imagine Learning and Imagine Math to provide an overview and train teachers how to successfully implement the programs and monitor student progress. ENL teachers will have ongoing PD through webinars and online communication with representatives. Topics to be covered: -Launching Imagine Math -Monitoring Student Progress -Implementing Imagine Learning -Supporting Student Learning at Home The principal will participate in the training sessions and provide ENL strategies to support student learning. The first of these sessions will take place on September 17, 2018 from 2:40 - 3:40. The second will take place on October 29, 2018 from 2:40 to 3:40. Title III teachers will receive ongoing PD during Monday professional development time to ensure student learning goals are met. Professional development agendas and attendance records will be maintained by the ELL supervisor. Online student progress reports will be maintained by ENL teachers and shared with classroom teachers. These programs assess student strengths and areas of need and provide students with targeted language support in literacy and content areas. As students make progress the program will adjust to provide them with more challenging and appropriate materials. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The school parent coordinator, the ENL Department and the ENL supervisor will conduct workshops for the parents of ELL students. The parent workshop will take place in October, December and February . The workshop topics are as follows: 1. Topic: Understanding the format of the NYS Mathematics and ELA tests and how you can help your child at home. Information will be provided on how to use Imagine Learning and Imagine Math at home to reinforce learning. 2. Topic: Community supports available to parents outside of the Department of Education. Parents will be provided with information on how to obtain language support and translation services throughout their communities. 3. Topic: Preparing your child for the NYSESLAT. Families will preview samples of the test and be given tips and strategies on how they can help their children to be prepared. Invitations to these workshops will be translated for families in a variety of languages. Agendas and attendance records will be maintained in ENL filing cabinet. If any translation services are 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities needed, we will contact the central office to provide any language support that the parent may need. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL per session Teachers $5,081.00 $2,000.00 $10,405.00 $17,486.00 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Payment of teacher per session to teachers in the program Paper, pencils, Notebooks, crayons,markers, toner etc for the students in the program Imagine Learning 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name The Bellaire School Borough Queens School Number 135 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Diana Lagnese Coach Barbara Pollack ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jeanette Villatoro Teacher/Subject Area Gregoria Giannou Teacher/Subject Area Jennifer Turbert Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Andrea Mitchell Coach NA School Counselor Paloma Hererra Parent Shani Reid Parent Coordinator Raul Lopez Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1034 5 Total number of ELLs 136 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.15%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In terms of literacy assessments, we incorporate Fountas and Pinnell benchmarking to screen our students for fluency and comprehension. The data results are two-fold and provide us with great insight into student's reading proficiency level. Any data patterns that we notice give us a good idea of how much the student has progressed in targeted areas such as fluency, phonemic awareness and reading comprehension. Furthermore, the results of the NYSITELL provide us with specific data on each of the students' strengths in the four modalities-speaking, listening, reading and writing. Once we analyze the data, we can see where a student needs instructional support. Understanding their proficiency levels allows us to group students accordingly and ensures lessons are differentiated to meet students needs. ENL personnel are responsible for checking the data results. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 6  ENL teachers and administrators regularly meet to discuss students' academic progress and at risk students. Staff utilizes common preps and Monday professional development to plan for student needs. Teachers look closely at formative assessment results to create differentiated plans for students. They identify trends in the data and look for strengths and weaknesses. Furthermore, ENL teachers provide classroom teachers with data from the EDAT and the RLAT to give them insight on their students so they can better plan their lessons by addressing the specific needs of ELLs. Classroom teachers also share the results of Fountas and Pinnell leveling as well as classroom assessments so that we can work together to support student learning. Suggestions and strategies are shared with classroom teachers at grade meetings and during professional development workshops 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? . NYSESLAT results are an important source of ELL data. We compare the results from year to year and check for areas of improvement and areas of weakness. If a student's data report shows areas of need, the data is assessed and the student is given any necessary interventions with the support of administration and the AIS teacher. This may include our morning and afternoon enrichment programs. We are working towards the goal of our students becoming proficient in the English language, but our main focus is improvement. We check data reports throughout year to see how the students progressed on the most recent NYSESLAT. ENL teachers analyze student progress across the four modalities and group them accordingly during academic instruction. When students have not made any progress, the RTI process begins. ENL teachers work closely with intervention teachers to analyze student classwork and level of language acquisition to determine next steps. Furthermore, we also analyze the 3rd-5th grade students' ELA and Math results to look for common trends. We can use the data to place the students in the proper groups for instruction. ENL personnel are responsible for checking the data results. The results are shared with administrators on each grade before implementing group instruction. Our most EDAT report indicates that our ELLs have difficulty in reading and writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gatherered and analyzed by the ENL teachers, administrators and classroom teachers, an education plan is put in place for each individual student. Collaboration with the PPT/RTI team provides suggestions and strategies so that our ELLs can be successful and work toward meeting Common Core Learning Standards. Parents are also notified and are part of our intervention process. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school refers to the ELL Policy and Reference Guide and Support Services for ELLs as a reference to better serve the students. The three tier RTI framework helps us to make decisions for our ELLs. Through regular PPT/RTI meetings and discussions with classroom teachers, ENL teachers, and parents, this framework has helped us to identify at risk students. By identifying the target group in need of support, we provide them with supplemental services such as at risk after school support small group instruction, and student specific strategies based upon learning style. Before referring students to RTI our staff takes the following into consideration: • Number of years of instruction in an English as a new language program • English and home language literacy • Content area and socio-emotional support needs of students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) • English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs • Results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam • English as a second language teacher recommendation • Content area teacher recommendation • Parent or guardian request • Sample of student work in English and, if possible, in the home language • Bilingual educational evaluation, if the student has or is suspected of having a disability 7  In our building, data drives instruction. When we receive data reports, such as the EDAT and the RLAT, we use the information to pinpoint student needs and supply them with the necessary academic interventions. Students in need of more intervention are provided whatever services are necessary. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Using the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELA, and Math results, alongside our own informal assessments, we are able to gauge the success of the students in order to make educational decisions for the following school year. By comparing year to year data trends we can look for areas of need that may follow the students. Classroom teachers and service providers can then plan for differentiated grouping in order to meet the needs of our ELLs.Assessment is collected through different outlets. The EDAT shows us how our ELLs compare to monolingual peers and identifies at risk populations. Through the use of the EDAT we find that our ELLs generally increased 1-2 language proficiency levels. Additionally, we also are able to identify long term ELLs who are at risk and plan for them accordingly to give them the support needed to reach a commanding level. Also, teacher generated assessment and standardized testing provide insight into student success and trends in progress. The assessment data is compared to NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data to look for trends, or problems areas that may have been overlooked. NYSITELL provides a starting point for teachers. This initial assessment gives ENL teachers information on English proficiency and allows students to be programmed for the correct amount of ENL services throughout the year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL teachers, classroom teachers and administrators collaborate and meet regularly to share reports, such as the RLAT and EDAT, and to analyze trends. Administrators work closely with ENL teachers to reorganize students and group them to best meet their individual needs and learning styles. Through this data analysis instructional decisions are made. Identification of students for ENL after school programs are based upon data collected from the NYSESLAT, EDAT, and ELA and Math assessments. Adjustments are ongoing and flexible to reflect our changing populations and new data. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. With the integration of the Common Core State Standards, instruction for ELLs has to be examined to see that we are providing the rigorous instruction that students can meet the standards. The ENL program enriches the student’s school day by providing targeted small group instruction with strategic and extended thinking embedded into the curriculum. Stand-alone ENL is provided for students who are entering and emerging as per the most recent NYSESLAT. Integrated ENL is where content area instruction is delivered with language scaffolds. Instruction is delivered by the classroom and ENL teacher that pushes into the classroom. Students at all proficiency levels receive integrated services to support content areas. The ENL teacher and classroom teacher work together to plan for collaborate teaching that ensures both language and content knowledge needs are met. Lessons are appropriately scaffolded for different ability levels. ENL teachers are given common planning time so that they can be prepared to follow the grade pacing calendar. As per CR Part 154.2, entering and emerging students receive stand alone (180 minutes) and integrated ENL services (180 minutes). Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of ENL services weekly for two years after testing proficient on the NYSESLAT. Students are grouped into a minimum of two heterogeneous classes on a grade level with mixed 8  proficiency levels. During the 2017-2018 school year fourth grade ELLs will be placed in a ENL self contained class. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? NYSESLAT results provide ENL teachers with the data necessary to determine the mandated number of minutes required for each student in the ENL program. ELLs are programmed into STARS to reflect their service in the free standing ENL program. If a child is having difficulty with a certain topic, the ENL teacher can reinforce the skill in question during their program. Entering and emerging students receive standalone (180 min) and integrated (180 min) ENL services. Transitioning, expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Commanding students receive 90 minutes weekly. ENL teachers closely monitor instructional minutes for each child in their caseload and frequently check data to update caseload as needed. Teachers consult the RADP new admit report, home language surveys, and NYSITELL results to ensure that students are correctly programmed in STARS and receiving the mandated number of minutes 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our free standing ENL program provides our diverse population of ELLs with high quality content instruction aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. Our ENL teachers plan for content area work that is grade specific for their students. ENL teachers attend grade levels meetings and following curriculum maps and pacing guides designed for grade level. Our Wonders literacy program provides scaffolds and differentiated strategies to meet specific language needs with high academic standards. ENL teachers and classroom teachers provide vocabulary support and vast opportunities for language practice throughout lessons, such as accountable talk and group projects. Print rich visual aids and technology are incorporated in the classrooms to promote English language acquisition. Students frequently work in collaborative groups to enhance academic and social practice of the English language. As common core practices make a shift towards non fiction material, it is much easier for the classroom teachers to incorporate content areas into their daily lessons. Students are involved in numerous hands on learning activities such science labs, participation in music lessons, and many cultural activities. All content areas are delivered in English with linguistic support. We have native language books available in our library and glossaries for translation. Students can borrow books from a wide range of content area topics. Core curriculum is covered during integrated ENL time. Here, students are receiving instruction in their class, and complete scaffolded activities that were designed with their skill set in mind. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking newcomers who are identified as ELLs by the NYSITELL are given the Spanish Lab to assess their native language proficiency. Additionally, ELLs are provided with glossaries to use in their classrooms throughout the year. ELLs in grades 3-5 are given oral translation or translated versions of state examinations if needed. ENL teachers identify student's need for translation by looking at proficiency levels, interviewing students and speaking with parents and classroom teachers. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 9  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. At registration we interview parents and students to determine if we have students with interrupted education to determine SIFE status. At the current time our school does not have any SIFE students as per the identification process and confirmed by the EDAT report. b. Students who are new to the country and score at the entering or emerging levels on the NYSITELL receive stand alone and integrated ENL services. They are scheduled for 4 periods stand alone and 4 periods integrated ENL in their classrooms. Certified ENL teachers provide integrated ENL services during literacy and content area periods and work in small groups to support our ELLs. These students are provided with visual aids such as picture dictionaries, flash cards, and a print rich classroom environment. In addition, classroom teachers and ENL teachers work together to differentiate content and curriculum. Prior knowledge is assessed in order to make meaningful connections to new language and vocabulary in the content areas. Students are given glossaries and paired with English proficient classmates to promote to social language development and interaction. During the 2017-2018 school we will continue the use of Imagine Learning. This computer based literacy program uses multimedia, such as video and animation, to deliver vocabulary rich content based units. Students are engaged in age appropriate activities to enhance reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills. This program is provided during the school day as well as during an after school program. Pending funds, newcomers will also receive phonics support from an experienced ENL teacher through Fundations in a before school program during the 2017-2018 school year. ENL teachers collaborate with classroom teachers during Tuesday planning periods and attend grade meetings. c. Developing ELLs will be provided with strategies and scaffolds to follow grade level curriculum. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive 4 periods of ENL services weekly. Through integrated ENL, students work closely with content and vocabulary rich authentic literature to assist them in meeting Common Core Learning standards. New content will be modeled and students will work collaboratively with peers to acquire new language skills. Supports such as Mathletics and the ENL Wonders materials will be used to reinforce academic concepts. Students are provided with afterschool support as needed. The results of the ELA exam are analyzed each school year to determine if any Expanding ELLs receive a level 3 or 4 to see if they can achieve a Commanding status. d. Long term ELLs are identified through the analysis of the EDAT. These students are closely monitored to assess individual needs. They are provided with small group instruction in the Integrated model. The student's area of needs are pinpointed through the NYSESLAT results and plans are put into place. Students are taught strategies to help them be successful on state examinations, specifically supporting reading comprehension and writing through the text. Additionally, students are provided with after school support as needed. e. Former ELLs are given 90 minutes of service weekly for two years after passing the NYSESLAT. They continue to receive academic support to build content area knowledge and vocabulary development. Along with current ELLs, commanding students receive testing modifications. Certified ENL teachers push in to provide extra support in the classroom setting. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWD's are carefully monitored. ENL teachers meet regularly with service providers to share information on students. IEPs are reviewed carefully in SESIS by ENL teachers to review goals and ensure accommodations are implemented. Special 0  education teachers work closely with the ENL program and help provide insight into the special learning needs of specific students. Special education service providers and ENL teachers work closely to make sure that there are no scheduling conflicts for IEP students. ELLs with IEPs always get the mandated amount of time according to their IEP and NYSESLAT results. Our school ensures that all IEP students receive an appropriate classroom setting that will let them work to the best of their abilities. Native language paraprofessionals can be provided for IEP students to provide translation for class work. IEP students are entitled to all other native language services previously specified. Additionally, an ENL teacher is part of the SIT team to discuss language acquisition needs of ELLs with disabilities. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school makes sure that all ELL-SWD students are provided with their mandated hours of ENL services. Before ENL groups are formed, teachers speak and plan with IEP service providers and classroom teachers to ensure conflicts in scheduling are avoided. ENL teachers schedule ELL-SWD students according to the group size indicated in their IEPs. Instruction for students with disabilities is scaffolded to meet individual needs of every student. ENL teachers monitor progress regularly through formal and informal assessments. This information is shared with classroom teachers and service providers. Close collaboration with the classroom teachers ensures that content curriculum is covered and IEP goals are met. Special education teachers consult with ENL teachers when writing annual goals and ENL teachers have a voice in the IEP. ELL-SWD students are also invited to join our ENL after school programs. All ELL-SWD are included in all school activities and programs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Before any intervention programs for ELLs are implemented, our ENL teachers analyze and review the EDAT to identify students who are at risk and not meeting expected Common Core Standards in literacy and Math. The information derived from the EDAT is shared and discussed with classroom and intervention teachers on the RTI team. According to each individual students' needs, a personalized intervention program is developed by the team of experts, including ENL teachers, intervention specialists and administrators, to enhance learning acquisition in language and content areas. RTI takes into consideration evidence such as: -number of years of instruction in an ENL program -English and home language literacy -content area and social/emotional needs of SIFE students -English and home language literacy of long term ELLs -results of the NYSESLAT -ENL teacher and classroom teacher recommendations -Parent or guardian request -student work samples in English and when possible in home language -bilingual evaluation if student is suspected to have a disability The support services are aligned to intervention plans our school is already providing to all students. ENL teachers consult RTI resources provided by DELLS. All intervention programs and provided in the English language. Our newcomers are introduced to "Imagine Learning" which is a web based language acquisition program where students are able to practice language, phonemic awareness skills, as well as reading comprehension and writing skills. Students participate in the after school program and have access to this program both in the classroom and at home. The program targets beginners in grades 2-5. After the beginners have been offered a seat in the program, ELLs performing at lower levels will be offered a seat. ENL teachers are continuously monitoring progress through web based reports which are shared and discussed with classroom teachers. The ENL program also benefits students greatly by utilizing technology in the classroom. Teachers expose the 1  children to supplemental educational programs, such as Reading A to Z and Starfall, in order to reinforce grammar, vocabulary and to read leveled short stories. These programs are catered to the individual language needs of every student and provide different levels of learning as the student progresses. The same procedure is implemented to support students at different levels. We also implemented the use of Ipads in some classrooms. The hands-on approach that the Ipad provides allows for students to have a richer experience during lessons. Touch screens allow students with disabilities to interact in lessons more actively. Smartboards are important classroom tools that enable exposure to visuals and to become more engaged in classroom activities. ENL students are entitled to participate in our intervention programs. Our after school YMCA and Legacy programs provide homework help for students with working parents. It also provides additional opportunities for social interaction in English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Data collected from classroom observations, classroom teachers, and student work samples indicate that many ENL students across the grades lack knowledge of phonemic awareness. This, as a result, delays their reading and comprehension skills. Pending funding, we plan to initiate an early morning program for these ENL students which will target their weaknesses in phonemic awareness. Fundations and T.C. Writing will continue to be part of our school's curriculum this year. Fundations (K-2) helps students with phonics and promotes literacy. We will continue with T.C. Writing which incorporates the workshop model in teacher lessons. This thinking out loud/model heavy approach guides students to become better writers. We will be using the Common Core aligned Wonders for literacy K-5, and GoMath as our math program K-5. Also, ELLs will benefit from small group guided reading instruction. These programs are aligned with common core standards and have proven to be very successful. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Depending on funding, we intend to continue our Imagine Learning and Imagine Math before and after school programs for ELLs to receive extended support through programs designed with expanded subject areas in mind. The Imagine Learning program provides students with home language support. The program provides students with directions and vocabulary in their home language while they engage in literacy activities to acquire English skills. Each after school class will provide our ELLs with differentiated language support as well as core ELA and mathematics instruction to reinforce the curriculum and Common Core Learning Standards. The use of after school technology gives ELLs an opportunity to be exposed to use resources outside of the classroom to enhance language skills. The computer lab and library will be accessible to our ELLs for additional exposure to literacy. ELLs, as well as all other students, are afforded equal access to these programs so we can make sure their needs are met in all areas. ELLs are invited to afterschool programs using translated letters. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school provides a variety of materials in order to support our ELL population. For each ENL classroom we provide visual, realia, flash cards, Spanish language libraries, charts and audio support. Students are also provided with glossaries in Spanish, Urdu, Bengali, Arabic, and Haitian Creole. Our Wonders reading program provides an ELL component where strategies are scaffolded for the need of ENL students according to their proficiency levels. Picture vocabulary cards are provided to help support student understanding of authentic literature. Each classroom is equipped with leveled libraries so that our students have access to fiction, nonfiction and a variety of genres at appropriate levels. This allows our ELLs access to independent reading materials. In math our ELLs are given additional support through the Imagine Math computer program. Students can access this program in school as well as at home. This program provides students with additional support to reinforce skills taught through GoMath. During mathematics instruction students are provided with vocabulary flashcards and manipulatives 2  such as counters, fraction bars, and 2D shapes to promote conversation during groupwork. Students in grades 3-5 are provided with translated glossaries of mathematical terms. Content specific glossaries are also provided in science and social studies. In science ELL students are given opportunities to practice new language skills and academic vocabulary through interactive science labs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Families are interviewed at registration by ENL teachers to determine home language. Parents are asked to indicate their preferred language of communication. Upon admission, newcomers are paired with another child on the grade that speaks the same language. This method has proven to be successful as it allows the new child additional support while adjusting to their new environment. Our school also utilizes bilingual staff for translation and guidance to facilitate the acclimation of newcomers. Students in the ENL program are provided with native language dictionaries/glossaries. Students in grades 3-5 are interviewed and provided content glossaries to support them on examinations. On state examinations students are provided with translated versions or oral translations as needed. We also contact the the Office of Translation and Interpretation when translated materials are needed or to communicate with parents. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our staff is trained to identify the services and resources needed to support our ELLs. ELLs are placed in age appropriate grades and given instruction aligned to grade level Common Core Learning Standards with linguistic support. Our school is using GoMath as our math program and Wonders and Teacher's College for our ELA curriculum. ENL teachers collaborate closely with classroom teachers to supplement lessons using ENL strategies during integrated ENL. This ensures that our ELLs are receiving all require services/support that correspond to their ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A Our school does not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Upon registration, we identify our ELLs and welcome them to our school. School office staff, administrators and ENL teachers are introduced to new families and given a tour of our school building and facilities. Our bilingual parent coordinator greets our families and information on translation services are provided. Newcomers are escorted to classrooms by ENL staff and introduced to faculty members. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers pair the new student with a classmate who speaks the same language if available. The students are scheduled for ENL services immediately and provided with materials such as glossaries, picture dictionaries, and vocabulary flashcards that teach basic communication skills. Changes to our programming reflect new admits and changes in data. Students who enroll throughout the school year are given access to afterschool programs and services as needed. All ELLs are welcome and placed appropriately by grade and level. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs participate in our current arts programs (art, music, character education) and are able to express themselves in new and creative ways. They learn new songs and are able to share their own cultures with the class through songs/dances of their own. In classrooms ELLs celebrate different aspects of their cultures through writing activities and share with their classmates during publishing parties. Classroom teachers host cultural food celebrations. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 3  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As per CR Part 80 a minimum of fifteen percent of required professional development for all teachers will be dedicated to language acquisition, including best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Each year teachers fill out a survey detailing the areas of practice they would like to improve upon. Teachers are able to choose which PD to attend to make it relevant to their classroom. If we cannot provide PD in a certain area, we look to outside sources for training. ENL teachers present topics for classroom teachers such as understanding proficiency levels and home languages, classroom environment for ELLs, activities for newcomers, scaffolding content areas, using technology to support language development, and assessments for ELLs. Teachers want to know how they can support ENL students in their classrooms and appreciate the support as they engage students in the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will be able to attend professional development workshops every Monday beginning September 2017. Spring 2018 dates/sessions will be created to follow-up from the previous sessions, and so that professional development reflects the needs of our growing populations and data. ENL teachers attend workshops offered by DELLs and other organizations. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To address the needs of our ELLs, our school provides professional development for all teachers and administrators. As per CR Part 80 a minimum of fifteen percent of required professional development for all teachers will be dedicated to language acquisition, including best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all ENL teachers, a minimum of fifty percent of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. ENL teachers meet with our administration throughout the year to discuss the current state of affairs and professional development needs. Through professional development teachers are provided with strategies to use with ELLs in their classrooms. PD is available for all staff including therapists, secretaries, parent coordinator, and special education providers. ENL teachers attend workshops throughout the year to receive their mandated hours of professional development. ENL teachers and school secretaries work together to ensure all steps in the initial identification process are taken. Minutes, agendas, and attendance lists are kept for records. Topics such as "making your classroom ENL accessible," and "differentiating for ELL's" are common topics requested by teachers. With the support of administration, ENL teachers are able to attend any workshop that would improve their practice. OELL, DELLS, and the Queens South FSC provide professional development that educate ENL teachers as well as administrators on the newest developments with an aim to enhancing academic opportunities for all ELLs. 4  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are one of our greatest allies when it comes to educating the students. Parents are constantly involved in helping the students learn the English language. Parents know that they are always welcomed to meet with us, and express any concerns or questions they may have. We plan to continue to meet with parents to discuss ways they can help their children make progress. In addition to the regularly scheduled parent meetings, the ENL teachers will conduct parent workshops. Some planned parent workshops include: how to use online educational programs at home, understanding the NYSESLAT, and ways to promote learning through their home language. These workshops will be conducted on Tuesday afternoons during parent engagement time. ENL teachers will work closely with administration and the parent coordinator to reach out to our ENL families through translated letters and phone calls. If the parent does not speak or understand English, a translator can be supplied from either our building staff or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. In order to follow new procedures, parents will have an extra individual meeting with their child's ENL teacher. Here they can discuss language proficiency assessment results and development needs. Teachers will document these meetings for future reference. We are also looking to use parent volunteers as translators for the school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our bilingual parent coordinator provides outreach for parents. His knowledge base provides translation services and support from city-wide programs that could benefit our students such as access to English classes and local libraries. We are also looking to use parent volunteers as translators for the school. Our ENL families are included in school activities such as movie nights, STEM nights, math game nights, physical fitness nights, the science fair and the spring and fall musical concerts. During the school day they are invited to events such as writing celebrations, wax museums and open houses. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Diana Lagnese, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Bellaire School School DBN: 29Q135 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Diana Lagnese Title Principal Andrea Mitchell Assistant Principal Raul Lopez Parent Coordinator Jeanette Villatoro ENL/Bilingual Teacher Shani Reid Parent Jennifer Turbert/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Gregoria Giannou/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Barbara Pollack Coach Coach Paloma Herrera School Counselor Beverly Mitchell Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 09/12/17 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q135 School Name: The Bellaire School Superintendent: Beverly Mitchel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Raul Lopez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At enrollment, ENL teachers will interview parents about preferred language options. If a language barrier prevents the teacher from discovering the preferred language, a translator will be contacted so that the parents can express their preferred language of communication. Bilingual staff members will be utilized first. If necessary the Office of Language and Interpretation will be contacted through the phone service system. This applies to written and verbal communication. Teachers use the HLIS, as well as the interview, as a reference. ENL teachers and school staff will use the RCLP, RAPL, and the UPPG reports to identify the preferred language of communication for speaking and writing . Blue emergency contact cards are also very helpful to school staff members when identifying preferred language of communication. The parent coordinator also has translation resources for parents at his disposal. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Bengali Haitian Creole Urdu Punjabi Chinese Arabic Gujarati Pashto Tigre Cebuano Temne French Dari/Farsi Sinhalese Ukrainian Hebrew English 88 31 18 17 6 2 9 2 4 1 1 1 3 1 1 1 0 8.55 3.01 1.75 1.65 0.58 0.19 0.87 0.19 0.39 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.29 0.1 0.1 0.1 0 89 33 20 17 6 2 9 2 5 1 1 1 3 1 1 0 1 8.65 3.21 1.94 1.64 0.58 0.19 0.87 0.19 0.49 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.29 0.1 0.1 0 0.1 843 81.92 837 81.34 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. There are not any languages that represent 10% of the population of our school. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families ENL service letters September and as needed Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated versions are acquired from the DOE. For non-covered languages 9  school calendar monthly NY State Testing Dates as needed After-school program information September and as needed Letters from the principal as needed we will use the DOE vendor " The Big Word." Bilingual staff members and the use of the Office of Translation and Interpretation services. For non-covered languages, money will be put aside to pay outside vendors for translation. Bilingual staff members, Office of Translation and Interpretation services, and from the NY state website. For non-covered languages, money will be put aside to pay outside vendors for translation. Bilingual staff members and the use of the Office of Translation and Interpretation services. For non-covered languages we will utilize DOE vendors. Bilingual staff members and the use of the Office of Translation and Interpretation services 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide parent teacher conferences September, November, March, May ENL parent orientation September and throughout the year as needed parent engagement Tuesday afternoons Promotion in Doubt As needed interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff members and the use of the Office of Translation and Interpretation services. For non covered languages we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" to notify parents. Bilingual staff members and the use of the Office of Translation and Interpretation services. For non-covered languages we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" to notify parents and provide information on the school year. Bilingual staff members and the use of the Office of Translation and Interpretation services. Bilingual staff members and the use of the Office of Translation and Interpretation services 0  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Families are notified through the use the school website, phone messenger system, and email. Bilingual staff members are available to communicate important information with families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. School staff members will attend a Monday professional development session and be provided with a copy of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. At this session teachers will learn how to upload letters to the Office of Translation and Interpretation. They will be given information on how to use the phone translation system when contacting parents. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school plans to fully comply with CR-A663. We have already canvassed the teachers for needed translators during parent conferences. The entire staff has been informed of the translation services. Everyone has a copy of the number and the language ID posters have been hung in all appropriate places. Translated brochures are given to new ELLs and their families at parent orientation meetings. Any forms that need to go out to parents will be translated accordingly. Our school provides translators for parent teacher conferences and a list of bilingual staff members is posted in the main office. We hire translators when bilingual staff members are unavailable. Announcements are made throughout the conferences so that parents are aware of available translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? ENL teachers, classroom teachers, and administration continuously communicate with parents to ensure that they are receiving adequate information from the school in their preferred language. Parent surveys from the ENL orientation, as well as the end of year parent survey, guide us to ensure all parents are heard, no matter what language they speak. Parent feedback is crucial when planning our next steps as a school. We'd like to supply parents with any translation services so that they can actively participate in their child's education. 1 
