 26Q158 School Name: M.S. 158 MARIE CURIE Principal: HENRY SCHANDEL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 26Q158 Marie Curie MS 158Q 342600010158 6-8 46-35 Oceania St., Bayside, NY 11361 718 423 8100 Phone Number: 718 423 8135 Fax: Henry Schandel hschandel@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Henry Schandel Dave Waltzer ChristalWu-Sing Henry Schandel N/A N/A Sabrina Perrin District Information Geographical District: 26 Danielle Giunta Superintendent: 61-15 Oceania Street, Bayside, NY 11364 Superintendent’s Office Address: dgiunta4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 631 6943 Phone Number: FSC: LIC 718 631 6996 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast   28-11 Queens Plaza North, Queens, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 391 8222 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Henry Schandel Dave Waltzer CristalWu-Sing Sabrina Perrin Melissa Corbett SilaAsa Alice Wong *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Assistant Principal Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joan Weibman Walter Puhalski Christine Hooper Robert LoBono Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview MS 158 has a caring and well-trained teaching staff. Our school maintains high standards and has a rigorous academic program. Our mission at Marie Curie Middle School MS 158Q is to prepare students to exhibit their competence as critical thinkers and creative individuals. Our learners will take responsibility and ownership of their learning to successfully contribute as a productive member of society.   We believe that students learn best when they are actively engaged in a rigorous program that encourages them to take ownership of their learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Marie Curie Middle School is located in Bayside, a middle class community in northeast Queens near the Queens/Nassau county border. This year we are celebrating sixty years of excellence. The school building houses a Beacon Program, managed by the Samuel Field YM/YWHA, which operates programs after school, in the evenings and on weekends for students of Marie Curie. The area is surrounded by parks, the largest of which are Crocheron, Alley Pond and Cunningham Parks. Nearby are Queensborough Community College, St. John’s University and Queens College. We celebrate a diverse population that includes 63% Asian students, 19% Caucasian students, 4 % African American students and 14 % Hispanic students. Students have the same Assistant Principal for their three year Middle School experience and the same Guidance Counselor who will follow them to the next grade until graduation. By building these relationships, a true sense of family is established and the needs of the students are identified and taken into consideration throughout their journey at MS 158Q. We offer an acclaimed quality performing and fine arts program that has been recognized at the local, city and state levels. In the past few years, MS 158 has received a Silver and Gold Award for the NYSSMA Competition. Last year the band won the highest award for a band, ‘Level 4 Gold’. This year the student participated and won Gold for level 3 competition. Students participate and receive awards in many competitions including Math Counts: First Place in the 2015 Queens Chapter and third place in the NYS Competition, The Stock Market Game: First Place winners Borough and several Citywide Art Competitions and Environmental Writing Competitions. Our art teacher was recently recognized as “Art Teacher of the Year for Region 8-NYC” and our Social Studies teacher was recognized as” New Teacher of the Year for Social Studies.” We also have a high percentage (38%) of eighth grade students who are accepted into the Specialized High Schools as well as sixth grade students accepted into the Hunter High School accelerated program. The Wall Street Journal recently printed a report showing that, on average acceptance into Specialized HS, MS 158Q performed number one in Queens. MS 158 has an active PTA as well as a School Leadership Team. We are a Magnet School for Science, Mathematics and Technology, integrating state of the art student computer labs, interactive Smart boards and new state-of-the-art Flat Screen Boards. We support and nurture our relationships with our local business community as well. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. MS 158 has a diverse student body embracing a variety of cultural, religious and ethnic backgrounds. Eleven percent of our student population are students with special needs. Seven percent of our student population is new English Language Learners. This past year, according the Middle School Quality Snapshot, we exceeded targets in closing the achievement gap for our students with special needs and our English Language Learners. Through creative programming we have maximized the use of personnel and time and implemented small instructional groups. Our main objective is to provide an optimal learning environment that is nurturing and recognizes the needs of each individual child. Our challenge to our students is "Aim to Succeed!” 0  Our Gifted and Talented Program has expanded to include a second class of sixth grade students who were admitted based on multiple criteria including a percentage of their fourth grade ELA and Math state exam scores. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the most recent data from our Quality Review Snapshot and Guide, students are meeting targets in achievement on ELA and Math examinations. We owe this to the effective teachers in all departments and our recent implementation of the i-Ready program. Our most recent New York State Regents pass rate was 100% in Earth Science and 100% in Algebra I for the 16-17 school year. In reflecting upon our first year using the Framework for Great Schools as an anchor [Framework for Teaching] we aligned our goals and made the most progress in Supportive Environment by working collaboratively to ensure our students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers. “While we know that each element of the Framework is a unique ingredient for school success, the impact on student learning is stronger when all elements are connected throughout the school community.” An element that will remain as a key focus and we will continue to strengthen is Strong Family and Community Ties. We will take advantage of community resources to enrich the life of the school. We will continue to work collaboratively to strengthen ALL areas of the Framework for Great Schools as we continue to analyze our data, identify our students’ and teachers’ needs and monitor our action plans to make certain that we ‘Aim to Succeed’ and Continue beyond our 60 Years of Excellence! 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 26Q158 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1059 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 45 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 13 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 56.0% % Attendance Rate 47.7% % Reduced Lunch 7.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 14.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.08 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 71.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 52 50 96.4% 8.7% 12.8% 4.8% 62.3% 1.4% 6 6% 5.9 69.7% 79% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES N/A NO YES NO YES N/A YES NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: According to the most recent Middle School Quality Guide's Framework Element Scoring Appendix, we are exceeding the target in the element of Rigorous Instruction with 90% positive responses to questions about Rigorous Instruction and was rated Well Developed in the most recent Quality Review on components 1.1 Curriculum, 1.2 Pedagogy, and 2.2 Assessment. Priority Needs: According to the most recent NYC School Survey Report, 83% of teachers agreed that in planning they had the resources and tools they needed to include multiple opportunities for building students' knowledge through content-rich non-fiction and 51% of students responded that in most or all of their classes, they learn a lot from feedback on their work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will deepen the work around writing in all content areas by examining the impact of descriptive feedback to on demand writing tasks with common rubrics resulting in 10% increase in student response to the NYC Survey question that in most of all of their classes, they learn a lot from feedback on their work. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  The Teacher Development Coach [TDC] will provide Teachers Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Administration, teachers, the Teacher Development Coach, Borough Support Staff differentiated support for teachers based on their needs and will support our student engagement goals as well as multiple entry points by training lead teachers to turnkey the information to their departments.  Teachers meet weekly as teacher teams of common students to discuss student writing performance with common rubrics across content areas for targeted students, and evaluate the quality of feedback provided to students and the implementation of that feedback in future writing.  Department supervisors are present at teacher team meetings to provide guidance and support in terms of evaluating student work and opportunities to enhance feedback.  PD opportunities will be offered on both department and grade team levels.  Word Generation [ Tier 2 vocabulary word] will continue to strengthen the vocabulary acquisition across the content areas We utilize:  Flexible grouping, student placement in the least restrictive environment, team meetings to discuss strategies to assist English New Learners [ENL] and Students with Disabilities [SWD]. We provide support for our teachers on strategies for teaching ENLs and SWDs, as well as multiple entry point strategies when planning lessons. Teachers are trained to read and interpret Individualized Education Plans in order to provide the proper modifications to ensure success.  Based on data analysis from the i-Ready diagnostic test in September and benchmark test in February, we are able to monitor student progress and determine the specific needs and next steps for our students.  The SWDs will participate in the American Reading Co. 100 book challenge, coupled with the Bridges to Literature books and modified Code X curriculum. Students Sept. 2018 thru Teachers, Administrators June 2019 4  Students will manage feedback logs with next steps for improvement provided by their teachers.  Parent workshops will be offered during PTA meetings and in the morning on: Common Core Learning Standards, Exit Projects, High School Application Process, and the use of I-Ready and Pupil Path; and TC Writing strategies.  Principal Chats will also address how parents can support our partnership in learning. Students, Parents Sept. 2018 thru Faculty , Parent Coordinator, Administration June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent workshops will be offered during PTA meetings and in the morning on: Common Core Learning Standards, Exit Projects, High School Application Process, and the use of i-Ready and Pupil Path; and TC Writing strategies.  Principal Chats will also address how parents can support our partnership in learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. I ready programs, PTA grant for AIS support, programming changes to add common planning time, Teacher Development Coach, Teacher's College materials and professional development. School budget allocations are reviewed and scheduled toward providing resources, materials and pedagogical tools to support the work of the CCLS and the instructional focus. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, at least 60% of all students will answer on a survey that they learn a lot from teacher feedback on their work. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 5  In-house Student survey; cycles of observation Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: Our areas of strength include the work of our Guidance Counselors, Assistant Principals, Psychologist, Dean and teachers centered on the belief that all children can learn under a safe, respectful, and trusting environment. We pride ourselves in creating that environment. As indicated on the most recent NYC School Survey, 100% of our teachers believe that their students can achieve high academic standards and 95% of our parents and students feel safe in the school. Priority Needs: After analysis of the most recent NYC School Survey regarding the supportive environment, it was indicated that 62% of students state “that in most of their classes, their teachers give them specific suggestions about how they can improve their work in class." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will deepen the work around formative assessment and examine the quality of descriptive feedback for students resulting in a 10% increase in student responses on the NYC School Survey Report to the question “In how many of your classes is the following statement true? My teachers give me specific suggestions on how I can improve in class.” 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Administration, School Based Support Team, Lead teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers meet weekly as teacher teams of common students to discuss student writing performance across content areas for targeted students, and evaluate the quality of feedback provided to students and the implementation of that feedback in future writing.  The Teacher Ambassador team will work with the administration to work with teachers in their departments on providing strong descriptive feedback for students with actionable next steps for improvement.  Professional development will be focused on assessment and feedback. Specifically on designing and implementing feedback loops that result in student awareness of suggestions on how they can improve their work as well as impact on student performance.  Teachers will receive non-evaluative feedback from the administration on their assessment system resulting in goals and next steps to improve the quality of assessments and feedback in their classroom. Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Administrators, School Based Support Team,Teachers We utilize: Students  Student Support Team weekly meetings to discuss at-risk students, Individualized Education Plans, and Behavioral Intervention Plans  Assign adult mentors to students to ensure social and emotional support and students know someone they can go to for guidance.  Assign student mentors to students who are new to the country. ENL are invited to participate in a cultural immersion program. Student Organization representatives meet with the Principal at a "Lunch with the Principal" l to discuss concerns and suggestions with specific attention to feedback they are receiving in their classroom. Student created positive messages posted throughout the building   8 Administration, teachers, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator  Translation of all communications  Teams meet with at risk parents on Tuesdays to support Students Sept. 2018 thru June 2019  the needs of the child and discuss how the parent can support the child at home. Student led conferences during Tuesday where students share with their parents and teachers the feedback they are receiving across classrooms, how they are progressing, and suggestions for future support in their goals.  Parent workshops on how to help their child succeed academically, emotionally and socially, as well as how to support their students based on the feedback they are being provided by their teacher.  Teachers communicate regularly with parents through Pupil Path-Skedula 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent workshops on how to help their child succeed academically, emotionally and socially, as well as how to support their students based on the feedback they are being provided by their teacher.  Teachers communicate regularly with parents through Pupil Path-Skedula Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Guidance Counselor, SBST, Project Wisdom, Words of Wisdom and Common Sense, PTA funded anti-bullying programs Monies to support professional development on PBIS and additional planning time; support staff (guidance counselors, Parent Coordinator) Monies to purchase Datacation/Skedula and online software-I Ready Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 65% % of all students will answer on a survey that their teachers give them specific suggestions about how they can improve their work in class. 9  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In-house Student survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strenghts: 95% of teachers feel supported by their colleagues according to the most recent NYC School Survey. Teachers work in various teams (department, grade, and commonly taught students) to improve instruction. Teachers take part in inter-visitations to observe fellow colleagues in gaining knowledge. New teachers are assigned experienced colleagues to act as mentors to guide them on pedagogical processes and class management. There are Congruence meetings between general education teachers and the ELL teachers to discuss students' progress and strategies to improve students' overall learning experience. The assistant principals (APs) meet regularly with teacher teams to ensure curricular alignment and coherence across all grades. The teams utilize data to analyze gaps in learning, analyze student work and monitor misconceptions before teaching next lessons. They engage in cycles of lesson plan study and learning walks looking at student work products. All teams are focusing on multiple entry points and Depth of Knowledge (DOK) higher order questions and discussions to promote higher level thinking. Priority Needs: According to the most recent NYC School Survey 43% of teachers thought there “wasn’t enough time provided for collaboration.” Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will deepen the work during teacher team meetings to enhance consistency across grade and content areas resulting in a 10% increase in positive teacher response on the Learning Environment Survey under Collaborative Teachers. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We utilized the research-based work from "Differentiation in Middle and High School: Strategies to engage all learners"; The Professional Learning, as well as the Danielson Rubric to plan our work. All teachers Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Administration, Teachers and District support ● Professional Development provided on a bi-weekly basis by teacher leaders. ● Professional development topics will include: strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, strategies to address the needs of English language learners, improving teacher practice using the Danielson Framework, Common Core alignment to classroom activities, and utilizing technology in the classroom and student engagement. ● Each professional development session will include a component to provide teachers time to collaborate on the respective topics with their colleagues. ● Teacher will enhance their ability to plan and deliver units and lessons that engage students in important cognitively challenging work with activities differentiated to support all students based on their specific needs. . Administration will meet with teacher teams to provide feedback and guidance on the inquiry process. A template was also designed to monitor the work of the teams. ● Experts in the field of students with disabilities and English language learners will provide professional development for the staff to adjust teacher practices and in turn address the needs of these specific students. Teachers will meet as weekly inquiry teams to study the effect these practices are having on SWD and ELL performance. ● Collaborative time will be embedded in the PD for teachers to share best practices. All teachers Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Administration, Teachers and District support 2 The professional development committee will meet in September, February and April to evaluate the needs of the staff as we progress through the year. ● TEQ online blended learning opportunities will be provided to assist teachers in taking ownership of their professional growth. ● On Tuesday’s teacher teams can invite parents to discuss the progress of their child and better develop the home school connection. All teachers ● Pupil Path is available and translated in multiple languages to assist parents with how their child is performing. ● Parent workshops on the use of i-Ready and Pupil Path will be held throughout the year. Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Administration, Teachers and District support 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On Tuesday’s teacher teams can invite parents to discuss the progress of their child and better develop the home school connection. ● Pupil Path is available and translated in multiple languages to assist parents with how their child is performing. ● Parent workshops on the use of i-Ready and Pupil Path will be held throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budgetary considerations for materials, personnel, and time allotment to plan effective professional development. and technology PD monies. workshop participants will turnkey their training; coverages for intervisitations and planning PD; monies for time with the Talent Coach. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 50% of teachers will answer on a survey that they have time to work and plan together collaboratively. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 3  in-house survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths The most recent Quality Review rating was well developed. The Middle School Quality Snapshot data reflects Exceeding target while closing the achievement gap. The Quality Review 5.1 was rated well developed regarding the quality of school level decisions, making adjustments as needed to increase coherence of policies and practices across the school, with particular attention to the Common Core Learning Standards [CCLS]. As indicated on the NYC School Survey, Over 90% of parents/guardians agreed that the school leaders encourage feedback from the community, practices shared decision making, and creates a sense of community. Priority Needs 55% of teachers agreed that the school leaders participate in instructional planning with teams of teachers. 82% of teachers were rated Effective or Highly Effective in Domain 1: Planning and Preparation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of lesson specific feedback and professional development provided by the administration anchored to Domain 1: Planning and Preparation, teacher ratings in Domain 1 will increase10% from the 2017-18 data. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We utilized the work from "Differentiation in Middle and High School: Strategies to engage all learners"; as well as the Danielson Rubric to provide teachers with PD needed to impact change during the Monday PD time of 80 minutes per week. Teachers Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 School leaders, teachers, District/Borough support, Talent Coach ● In lessons there will be a concentration on the CCLS instructional shifts, Domain1 components of the Danielson Framework as well as teacher-developed action plans to address multiple entry points and differentiation. ● The Teacher Development & Evaluation Coach (TDEC) and Interschool Teacher Development Coach will also provide the administration with training on how to norm feedback, as well as inter visitations to align feedback and make sure it is focused , timely, concrete and actionable which in turn will improve teacher practice. The administration will norm observations during Cabinet to ensure the feedback is actionable and appropriate for strengthening teacher practice. ● The Interschool Teacher Development Coach will work with teachers in non-evaluative cycles to assist in improving practice and supporting the instructional focus. ● Administration will nurture teacher development to encourage teacher created PD and build leadership capacity by working collaboratively to set standards of quality instruction and effective and purposeful PD. ● Encourage teachers to be leaders by developing leadership skills. As evidenced by teacher mentors as well as teacher designed and facilitated PD. ● Administration will monitor teacher teams to see how they are making an impact on teacher practice. ● PD tailored to address the strategies for teaching SWD and ENLs. Teachers Sept. 2018 thru Teachers, Talent coach June 2019 6 Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration, Teachers, Parents ● Congruence of ENL teachers with General Education teachers will be programmed monthly. * Teachers will share best practices at teacher team meetings. ● Monthly Parent Workshops to support initiatives and parent needs based on surveys Parents ● SLT input in revising school’s mission and vision and also the CEP narrative. ● ELL parent meetings during the scheduled City conference days ● School messenger and Pupil Path to communicate events and deadlines ● Translated Principal Monthly letter ● Translated Website ● Teacher to teacher scheduled intervisitations, TDC debriefing with teachers, administrative feedback conversations, teacher led PD, Celebration of teachers' accomplishments. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Workshops to support initiatives and parent needs based on surveys; Monthly coffee chats with the Principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher Talent Coach, Teacher Development Coach, i-Ready, Data Analysis Coach books, programming of common planning time, District support Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher ratings of Effective or Highly Effective 1a and 1e will increase at least 5% 7  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP data in Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: ● The Middle School Quality Snapshot indicates that 91% of the parents are satisfied with the education their child has received. ● 90% of parents are registered on Pupil Path [resource for parents to view daily progress, grades]. Our attendance rate is 97% which is a positive indication of school environment Areas in need of strengthening include: ● The Learning Environment Survey 14-15 indicates that 48% of the parents took the survey. This is below the City’s percentage rate of 54%. It would be advantageous to increase the interest of parents in their child’s school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will improve the school learning environment as measured by a 10% increase in attendance at family engagement events as evidenced by closing the gap between the NYC average and school’s average which will build stronger relationships and encourage more family involvement. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Utilizing various articles published in Educational Leadership as well as Leverage Leadership we are able to build stronger relationships with the community. Teachers, Parents Sept. 2018 thru Administration, PTA June 2019 ● The new contract allows for parent communication during Tuesday afternoon. Teachers can meet with parents in teams, and/or contact parents with positive messages as well as reaching out to parents on how they can support their children. ● Teachers update Skedula, the online grading system and parents can view through Pupil Path. ● Parent workshops are planned based on interest surveys and needs. ● PTA is building more opportunities for parents to be involved in school activities: dances, fundraisers, breakfasts, etc. ● Students will be provided with various motivational techniques to make sure parents respond. Some include: offering a raffle prize to classes whose parents complete surveys before a certain deadline. ● There will be workshops to help the parents of ENLs and SWDs best support their child with class work and homework. ● Parent surveys will be created and given throughout the year to find out needs. Responses will then be used to address concerns and adjustments made. ● The PTA will offer more workshops for parents that will be based on interests: anti-bullying, Exit Projects, Common Core etc. ● Coffee Chats with the Principal with a specific focus; teacher presentations of content during the coffee chats– PTA surveys and workshops, School Leadership Team developing the CEP and revising the school’s mission and vision statement, PTA activities. Parents of ELLs and SWDs. Parents Sept. 2018- June 2019 ENL teachers, administration PTA, Administration Sept. 2018 thru June 2019 0 Students, Parents Sept. 2018 thru Teacher, Administration June 2019 ● More teachers inviting parents into classrooms during special presentations such as Meet the Author, Exit Project Presentations etc. * Parent Book Study once a month through the UFT  We will partner with Flushing Council on Culture and the Arts as well as Queens Borough Historian, Jack Eichenbaum, Ph.D. to present Queens History Tours. This program will support Social Studies content with a focus on United States, New York, and Queens in particular through seven local history tours throughout Flushing and Bayside, Queens. Selected students who have a passion for history as well as their parents will be able to: o identify and describe various Queens' historic sites, from 17th century to present day. o connect present historical developments to specific circumstances of time and place to broader regional, national, or global processes. o and develop as independent learners by learning to travel on public transportation and building on community awareness.  A program for ENL students,Immigrant Experience, was developed to increase the knowledge of the American culture. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Samuel Field Y Beacon Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for SKEDULA/PUPIL PATH; funding to maintain School Messenger, Funding to purchase Parent Handbooks on various topics: CCLS, Organization, HW, Bullying etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  In January and May 2019, a school created survey will be given to parents to monitor parent communication. Parent communication will be ongoing regarding the 2017 Learning Environment survey and its completion. We will monitor the response rate to reach out to parents who did not respond starting with first week of distribution in February 2018. Our midyear target for participation is 90%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group instruction one to one online access for students using i-Ready When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before School, on Saturdays and during lunch periods. Small instructional groups, one to one online access for students using i-Ready. Before School, on Saturdays and during lunch periods Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Targeted students are determined by the lowest third of the population based on NYS ELA assessments, marking period grades, All ESL and SWD students are targeted for AIS services. Targeted students are determined by the lowest third of the population based on NYS Math assessments, marking period grades, All ESL and SWD students are targeted for AIS services. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) I-Ready.com will provide Common Core aligned instruction, progress monitoring and diagnostic reports. The ELA component of the program focuses on the individuals priorities in phonics, fluency, vocabulary etc. using i-Ready tools for instruction. ESL instruction will concentrate on reading, writing, listening and speaking -Ready products will provide Common Core aligned instruction, progress monitoring and diagnostic reports. Teacher teams will analyze student work, examine instructional strategies for multiple entry points and refine curriculum to support students. A CCLS aligned Algebra regent’s review will assist in 3 Small instructional groups Before school, on Saturdays and during lunch periods Small instructional groups before school and during lunch periods Before school, on Saturdays and during lunch periods Small groups, large groups and individual counseling During the day and during PD and Tuesday contracted time Science Analysis of prior regents’ skills and also MOSL assessments. Social Studies Analysis of prior regents’ skills and also MOSL assessments. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Mandated and at-risk students the diagnosis and support of deficiencies. Citywide baseline assessments were given to every student. Teachers analyzed the results of the exams and used the item skills analysis to drive instruction and plan for differentiation. Citywide baseline assessments were given to every student. Teachers analyzed the results of the exams and usedthe item skills analysis to drive instruction and plan for differentiation. Counseling sessions both group and individual, deal with academic, social and emotional related issues. Conflict resolution and social skills training are part of the meetings. There are parent and teacher consultations as well as a review of student records and profiles. Crisis intervention and at-risk counseling are recommended during pupil personnel meetings. Supportive services and referrals for community support are also provided. 4  An anti-bullying club also meets after school to discuss positive strategies to make MS 158Q a bully free zone. 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  materials, book bags, reading materials and general supplies 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Last year's amount: $2579 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 8  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 9  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Marie Curie MS 158Q ,, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Marie Curie MS 158Q will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Marie Curie MS 158Q,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 3  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 4  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 5  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 6  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our school has a free-standing ENL program. We provide services for this program for up to 50 entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding English Language Learners in grades 6, 7, and 8. The title III funding will provide supplemental services for our ENL population in the following ways. The 2017-2018 progress report indicated that we did close the achievement gap on the New York State ELA and Math state exams. The data indicated that with the test becoming more difficult and with the new addition of two CCLS aligned tasks in the content areas, there is need for more support for our ELLs. We will provide differentiated instruction through small group instruction in the content areas of Math, ELA, and Science. This will be done using an ENL approach based on NYS ESL Learning Standards. Students will be taught to listen, speak, read, and write in English for 1) information and understanding 2) literacy response, enjoyment, and expression 3) classroom and social interaction and 4) cross-cultural understanding and knowledge. English Language Learners will be held to the same high expectations outlined in the CCLS. In order to be successful, these students will require targeted instruction as they acquire proficiency in English. We have purchased the 3rd edition of "Weaving it Together, Connecting Reading and Writing" for grades 6,7,8 to support the students in the Title III program. This new edition of "Weaving it Together,Connecting Reading and Writing" is aligned to the CCLS. Differentiated items are included throughout the book so that English Language Learners can build on prior knowledge as they approach greater rigor. Activities are scaffolded so as to provide deeper instruction as complexity increases. There is an equal emphasis on writing as there is on reading as well as instruction in improving listening and speaking skills. This instruction will take place early in the morning before school and after school from November 2018 through May 2019 by two certified ENL teachers paid by Title III funds scheduled in per session. Assessment to evaluate the effectiveness of the program is based on scores obtained on the NYSESLAT in May of 2019. Ms. Vlaco will be teaching 2 hours in the morning from 7:25 to 7:55 am and Ms. Ho will be teaching 2 hours in the afternoon from 2:20 pm to 3:20 pm per week for 20 weeks @ $60.65 per hour (with fringe). One supervisor will also be paid by Title III funds at $63.45 for 2 hours per week for 20 weeks for the after-school hours only. iPads will also be used for the Title III program to assist the students in communication and acquisition of language. These iPads will be labeled "Property of Title III Program" Records will be maintained, including student attendance and program notification in parents’ preferred languages. Home language support will be provided as requested. The activities that students will be engaged in during the program will be centered around reading and writing skills which will be integrated using a systematic approach. Students will engage in pre-reading and predicting activities and read high interest passages related to the theme of the unit. Vocabulary exercises include: Vocabulary in Context, Vocabulary Building, and Word Partnership activities. Students will engage in discussion and critical thinking activities while utilizing organizational techniques to support writing. In connection with each reading, a different aspect of essay writing is developed. The language of instruction is English. The subgroups of students 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information to be served in this program are as follows: entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding English Language Learners in grades 6, 7, and 8. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development is ongoing throughout the 2018-2019 school year so that all teachers will understand strategies for working with ELLs throughout the students' language acquisition process. All classroom teachers will receive the training. The ENL teachers meet with the content area teachers who have high proportions of ELLs in their classes. Teachers will be provided time to work collaboratively to outline curriculum with a language development plan during Monday professional learning time. The teachers will be provided time for collaboration. Records of agendas and attendance sheets will be maintained and stored in the "ELL Binder of Critical Documents". Additionally, there are several PD conferences scheduled for the school year. We will use collaborative team meeting time to discuss strategies that should be utilized to assist the ELL population. We will also provide meeting times during the school year for the entire staff to discuss the following strategies. ELL in the content area-November 2018 and ongoing throughout the year Use of graphic organizers-ongoing throughout the year ELL strategies and techniques for the Mainstream Teacher-ongoing throughout the year Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs in the Secondary Schools- January 2019 Teaching ELL students in mainstreaming classes(utilizing small group instruction)-October 2018 ELL congruence meetings quarterly between ENL and Mainstream staff This PD will positively impact the progress of ELL students by strengthening the academic bridge between student and teacher. The ENL staff will assist teachers in preparing lessons to support the students during small group instruction. This component is at no additional cost to program. Ms. Vlaco and Ms. Ho, our ENL teachers will assist with this work. This professional development opportunity will be facilitated during our monthly Monday professional learning time. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Research shows that parent engagement impacts higher achievement for students. An ELL Parent Meeting for 1 hour with 2 certified ENL teachers will be held in November of 2018 and in February of 2019 prior to the normally scheduled evening Parent-Teacher Conferences. Topics to be discussed include ELL Program Overview, Report Cards, Use of the translated school's website, ENL Enrichment Programs and information and Use of "I-Ready", the school-wide reading computer program, "Go Math" , the school math computer program, and "Pupil Path" to monitor student progress, assignments, and grades in school. Other topics include State Math & ELA Exams, NYSESLAT Exam, Promotion Criteria as well as any Questions or Concerns. Parent and Student Workshop Series will also be provided to maintain parent involvement in their child's education. Three hours of per session @ the rate of $60.65 will be scheduled in the T 3 budget for these series since they are after school and additional monies are also scheduled in OTPS for resources. Topics included but not limited to: Helping my Child with Homework Access to Pupil Path and School Website Self-Regualtion and Social Emotional Techniques using the Mood Meter Parent Guide to Common Core State Standards High School Information Night Respect for All: Making NYC Public Schools Safe and Supportive for All Students Middle School Success Strategies Communicating with your Teenager Internet Safety and Cyberbullying College and Career Readiness: The 21st Century includes You! Parents and Guardians of ELLs are also invited to Resource Fairs in partnership with the Citywide Council of Special Education. Parents can come and learn about community resources and recreational opportunities such as: AllCare Provider Service BiLinguals Inc. Resources for Children with Special Needs. Parent to Parent. Our ENL teachers in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator and Assistant Principal of ENL work together to provide most of these workshops and conferences. Invitations and letters to all conferences and workshops are translated into the students' native languages and distributed to the parents and/or guardians in their preferred languages . We also have translators available to assist during parent conferences and workshops. Agendas and attendance sheets to conferences and workshops are maintained and stored in the " ELL Binder of Critical Documents". Approximately 3% of the T3 Budget is allocated to parental engagement activities and will cover, per session meetings for parents/activities after school. Refreshments will be provided. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $7571.95 1 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2 teachers@ 2hrs. week ea.for before and after school program/parent meetings Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4hrs per week x 20 weeks=80hours 80hours@$60.65= $4852.00 1 supervisor= 2hrs per week x 20 weeks= 40hours 40hours@63.45= $2538.00 3hours@60.65=$181.95 Grades 6-8 Hi/LO Classroom Library for students and teachers($2080.00) Weaving it Together Level 1 $36.91x 20=$738.20 Weaving it Together Level 2 $36.91x20=$738.20 Weaving it Together Level 4 $36.91 x 12= $442.92 2 iPads@$385.00= $770.00 Refreshments for families  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $3999.32 $770.00 $24.73 12366.00 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 26 School Name Marie Curie Middle School Borough Queens School Number 158 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Henry Schandel Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joanne Coneglio-Vlaco Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Martelli- Core Teacher/Subject Area Lori Kantor- ELA Related-Service Provider Joan Weibman Superintendent Danielle Giunta Assistant Principal June Dunn Coach School Counselor Steve Epstein Parent Monica Tarrao Parent Coordinator Margaret Polizzi Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1082 3 Total number of ELLs 83 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.67%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the following tools to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs. Newly enrolled ELL students who are identified as eligible to be tested based on the Home Language Survey are tested with the NYSITELL within 10 days of registration by the ESL Coordinator, a licensed ENL teacher. The reading NYSITELL scores for newcomers provide initial data as to the reading level of the ELL students. In addition, NYSESLAT scores, ELA scores, and data available on School Net are also used as a tool to assess the literacy skills of ELLs. Furthermore, all students, including ELLs , are assessed school-wide using the on-line computer-based program, "i-Ready" , to measure and assess the reading lexile level and the literacy skills of all students. The data provided by these assessments in addition to other general assessments taken on a regular basis all serve to determine the academic needs of ELLs and help inform the school's instructional plan. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 4  Once the lexile level and literacy skills of students are assessed, the data provided by these assessments serve to determine the academic needs of ELLs. Teachers assign weekly individualized and specific on-line "i-Ready" assignments that focus on the literacy needs and skills of each individual English Language Learner. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Over the course of the year, at several meetings of the Language Allocation Policy Team, which includes representatives of all stakeholders, analysis was made of ELL progress as indicated by the NYSESLAT. By examining the RLAT which shows NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results over several years, it became obvious that marked progress is being achieved by most ELL students. The results of the 2016 New York State standardized tests indicated with continued content-based ELL instruction, staff development and adhering to congruence, our ELL students have and will continue to progress. The consensus is that by and large ELL students are succeeding, but that the goal is to ensure that all succeed. M. S. 158 has been cited for exemplary success in its ESL program. Our goal is to maintain and build on this success. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Marie Curie Middle School 158 follows a multifaceted approach regarding targeted intervention strategies and programs for ELLs, long-term ELLs and SIFE students. The needs of these students are varied and assessment is used to drive instruction. All ELLs receive the mandated number of periods of ELL services. These classes focus on all four modalities of language learning - listening, speaking, writing, and reading. Long term ELLs and SIFE students receive additional services beyond the mandated number of periods of ELL services in the form of push-in ELL, peer tutoring programs, PTA funded extra programs, ELL summer school and Title 3 classes. All ELL students are included in the extended day Title 3 program. In addition to the above, there is specific emphasis based on the individual needs of long term ELLs and SIFE students. Based on an analysis of the NYSESLAT, needs for specific long term ELLs and SIFE students have been identified. These identified needs are in the areas of listening, writing, reading, and speaking. Special education students have been included in this analysis. Their greatest needs are in the areas of reading and writing. For long term ELLs the interventions are: • Listening; Title III extended day and Saturday classes are available for all ELL students. The emphasis in these classes is on speaking and listening skills. Staff development has specifically addressed the needs of these ELL students to focus on listening skills. • Reading: Long Term Ells are provided with extra periods of ESL instruction beyond their required units. • Writing: Long term ELLs are paired with other students to provide them with specific skills in writing. They also are given extra periods of ELL instruction. • Special Education: Teachers and Paraprofessionals provide tailored differentiated instruction based on long term ELLs assessed needs as indicated in their IEPs. The interventions for SIFE students include all of the above. In addition, they are provided differentiated instruction by all of their teachers. Individual prescriptive and diagnostic plans are designed to facilitate tutoring and instruction. Counseling and referrals for related services are given based on need. Appropriate bilingual related services are available. All SIFE Students participate in summer and extended day programs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on an analysis of data patterns across proficiency levels in grades six to eight, the majority of ELL students who take the NYSITELL exam are newcomers to the country and are Beginner level students. A further analysis of data patterns across proficiency levels and grades shows that in grades six to eight there is generally an equal number of Beginner, Intermediate , and Advanced students. Special attention is given to the subtests as reported on the RLAT so that once again, instruction is differentiated and students’ weaknesses are addressed. According to the RLAT, most Beginner and Intermediate students need 5  support and instruction in all modalities whereas most Advanced students need extra support in reading and writing as opposed to speaking and listening. This is a common pattern for ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL teachers work closely with other pedagogues as well as with the administration. Staff development is ongoing. The training includes presentations, strategies, inter-visitations, activities, lesson-studies and the elements of a balanced literacy program with an emphasis on adapting it to the needs of ELL students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ES Programming and Scheduling ELL students are programmed into ELL classes at the start of the school year, so there is continuity of services and support at all times. We currently have three licensed ENL teachers who provide services to all mandated students. Marie Curie Middle School 158 is currently using a Stand-alone ENL and integrated heterogeneous ENL program that provides all language arts and subject matter instruction in English. Students are grouped heterogenously and by grade. In the Stand-alone program, Entering and Emerging level students are grouped together in one class by grade and transitioning and expanding students are grouped together in another class by grade. Students are also grouped heterogeneously and by grade and provided the mandated instruction according to their proficiency level as required by NYSED, CR Part 154 in an integrated ENL push-in program by three licensed ESL pedagogues. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? From the first day of school, ELL students receive a full program and are scheduled for one period of “Stand-alone” English-acquisition-focused instruction, the four major subjects, P.E. and a foreign language. During the year ATS reports are frequently run to ensure each student eligible for ENL serivecs is identified. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive a total of 360 minutes of standalone ENL as well as integrated ENL/ELA instruction. Transitioning and Expanding ELLs receive a total of 180 minutes of standalone and integrated ENL instruction. Expanding ELLs receive the required 180 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. Commanding level ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction in ELA as well as content area subject classes. “Stand-Alone” class is delivered to ELLs of the same grade. In addition to ENL instruction in grade level “Stand-Alone” classes, the mandated periods of Integrated ENL in content area subject classes are provided by licensed ESL teachers for Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding, and Former ELLs during content instruction in collaboration with regular classroom teachers to ensure students receive mandated instruction according to their proficiency level as required by NYSED, CR Part 154 Regulations. 6  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELL students are exposed to grade level content lessons with great support. Subject area teachers are periodically instructed in the most effective and up-to-date strategies for teaching their subject to new language learners. Staff development is frequently included at monthly faculty meetings. All mainstreamed ELL students are identified to all subject teachers so that instruction is differentiated to meet their special needs. ELL students receive content area instruction in English. To make content comprehensible and enrich language development a variety of research- based approaches are utilized such as the holistic approach which integrates speaking, listening, reading, and writing for unified literary instruction, the natural language approach which focuses on communication as its primary goal, the sheltered instruction approach, whereby students develop in specific subject areas through direct instruction of vocabulary and grammar, learning key words, phrases, or concepts using context clues and making extensive use of modeling strategies by relating instruction to students’ background knowledge and experience, the cognitive academic language learning approach, and the balanced literacy approach. Cooperative learning strategies are used such as brainstorming, questioning, predicting, and making inferences. Other strategies include scaffolding, concept mapping, and web-diagramming, and jigsaw activities to make academic instruction understandable to students of different second language proficiency levels. A Balanced Literacy approach is also used with read-aloud, shared reading, guided reading, independent reading, interactive reading, and phonic reading activities. Also brainstorming, planning, revising, editing, and group share-out and review of written material are also used to strengthen student writing. Instruction is within the framework of the Reading Writing Workshop model. Reading basic language and literacy books provide systematic language development as well literacy instruction. High-interest, low –level, intermediate-level and high-level literature and content-based readings further enrich language development in the content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages students' native language skills. This is achieved through use of translated textbooks, leveled textbooks and translated glossaries as part of the ENL program. In addition, independent reading books in their native language are provided in the ESL classroom and general education classrooms as well as teacher/student created materials to support content area instruction such as bilingual vocabulary cards and leveled ESL textbooks in the different content areas. Translated versions of standardized tests are provided to our English Language Learners. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Marie Curie Middle School 158 follows a multifaceted approach regarding differentiated instruction to ELLs in schools less than three years (newcomers), ELLs in schools 4 to 6 years, long-term ELLs and SIFE students and ELLs identified as having special needs. The needs of these students are varied and assessment is used to drive instruction. a. Plan for SIFE: There are no SIFE students designated ELL this year. When we have SIFE students, the plan is as follows: SIFE students receive the mandated number of periods of ELL services. These classes focus on all four modalities of language learning - listening, speaking, writing, and reading. SIFE students receive additional services beyond the mandated number of periods of ELL services in the form of integrated ENL, peer tutoring programs, PTA funded extra programs, ELL summer school and Title 3 classes. b. Plan for ELLs in school for Newcomers: All ELLs receive the mandated number of periods of ELL services. These classes focus on all four modalities of language learning - listening, speaking, writing, and reading. New York State English Language Arts, English as a Second Language Learning Standards and Common Core State Standards serve as the basis for ESL instruction and planning. All programs for ELLs are aligned with the Comprehensive Core Curriculum. In conjunction, the four skill areas - listening, speaking, reading, and writing are integrated to support the language and literacy development of ELL students. 7  NYSED Proficiency Levels for English as a Second Language provide a framework, which is presented using a Balanced Literacy approach. Our plan is to provide ELL with a rigorous intensive Core curriculum to support the language and literacy development of ELL students. c. Plan for Developing ELLs in school: Our plan for those "Developing" students is to focus instruction on their areas of weakness and work to improve their skills. We will also focus on developing reading and writing skills in order to move them further towards attaining a proficiency level on the NYSESLAT. We will work on specific strategies to improve their reading and writing skills. These students will receive additional individualized reading and writing instruction using a computer based literacy program, “i-Ready” . These students will also receive additional services beyond the mandated number of periods of ELL services in the form of integrated ENL , peer tutoring programs, PTA funded extra programs, Saturday Enrichment Programs to help enrich and improve current reading and writing skills. These students will receive additional support in reading and writing in Title 3 classes. All ELL students are included in the Title 3 and Saturday Enrichment programs. d. Plan for Long-Term ELLs: The majority of our long -term ELLs are in special education classes and/or have been x-coded. Our plan for those students who have been in ESL for 6 six years is to focus instruction on their areas of academic weaknesses and provide tailored differentiated instruction as indicated on their IEPs. These students will also receive additional individualized reading and writing instruction via the computer-based reading program, “i-Ready”. ELL teachers will collaborate with special education and CTT teachers, para-professionals, and guidance counselors to meet their needs. Title 3, Saturday Enrichment, and as well as all other schools programs will be utilized to assist and attain a level of proficiency on the NYSESLAT exam. e. Plan for former ELLs: Transitional support for students reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT is a key element of the continuum of services for ELLs. Research has shown that students do not achieve CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency) for an average of six years. Therefore, continuing support is necessary. This is done by identifying students who have recently passed the NYSESLAT and disseminating this information to the school community. These students continue to receive 90 minutes a week of integrated ESL services for two years after reaching the proficient/commanding level with a focus unique to their needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELLs identified as having special needs and/or disabilities use instructional strategies and grade-level materials that provide both access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. For those students with special needs and disabilities, their IEPs are taken into consideration as well as their needs as indicated by their NYSESLAT or NYSTELL scores. Teachers and Paraprofessionals provide tailored differentiated instruction based on long term ELLs assessed needs as indicated in their IEPs. They receive small group instruction in self-contained classes. They also have a bilingual para-professional who works one –on –one. Grade-level materials include individualized reading and writing instruction using a computer based literacy program, "i- Ready". This computer program enables students to work on specific strategies to iiimprove their reading and writing skills. We also use a computer based program called "myON" which is an on-line digital library with special features such as translated books, vocabulary look-up, lexile level diagnostic tests and books that are read aloud. "myON" is one of many tools used to increase student reading comprehension levels, allowing them to meet Common Core Learning Standards. To make academic content comprehensible and accelerate English language development, a variety of instructional strategies are employed such as cooperative learning strategies, scaffolding, concept mapping, web-diagramming, and jigsaw activiies. Multi-leveled content-based readings further enrich and accelerate English language development for ELL-SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of ELLs with special needs and disabilities, instruction is delivered in the least restrictive environment according to their IEPs. Instruction is delivered in the environment of small self-contained classes. They also have a bilingual para-professional who works one-on-one. Our plan is to continue working on areas of weakness. Based on the IEP, the students may be mainstreamed for certain content areas and provided with a more restrictive environment in other content areas depending on the IEP These students receive additional services beyond the mandated number of periods of ELL services in the form of PTA funded extra programs, Saturday Enrichment Programs to help enrich and improve current reading and writing skills. All ELL Students with special needs and disabilities are included in the ELL summer school and Title 3 classes. 8  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. B. Programming and Scheduling Marie Curie Middle School 158 follows a multifaceted approach regarding targeted intervention strategies and programs for ELLs, long-term ELLs and SIFE students. The needs of these students are varied and assessment is used to drive instruction. All ELLs receive the mandated number of periods of ELL services. These classes focus on all four modalities of language learning - listening, speaking, writing, and reading. Long term ELLs and SIFE students receive additional services beyond the mandated number of periods of ELL services in the form of push-in ELL, peer tutoring programs, PTA funded extra programs, ELL summer school and Title 3 classes. All ELL students are included in the extended day Title 3 program. In addition to the above, there is specific emphasis based on the individual needs of long term ELLs and SIFE students. Based on an analysis of the NYSESLAT, needs for specific long term ELLs and SIFE students have been identified. These identified needs are in the areas of listening, writing, reading, and speaking. Special education students have been included in this analysis. Their greatest needs are in the areas of reading and writing. For long term ELLs the interventions are: • Listening; Title III extended day and Saturday classes are available for all ELL students. The emphasis in these classes is on speaking and listening skills. Staff development has specifically addressed the needs of these ELL students to focus on listening skills. • Reading: Long Term Ells are provided with extra periods of ESL instruction beyond their required units. • Writing: Long term ELLs are paired with other students to provide them with specific skills in writing. They also are given extra periods of ELL instruction. • Special Education: Teachers and Paraprofessionals provide tailored differentiated instruction based on long term ELLs assessed needs as indicated in their IEPs. The interventions for SIFE students include all of the above. In addition, they are provided differentiated instruction by all of their teachers. Individual prescriptive and diagnostic plans are designed to facilitate tutoring and instruction. Counseling and referrals for related services are given based on need. Appropriate bilingual related services are available. All SIFE Students participate in summer and extended day programs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Programs will be enhanced for the upcoming school year. We have instituted a school wide computer-based Digital Media Content program, Discovery Education. Discovery Education streaming is a digital video-based learning resource scientifically proven to increase academic achievement. It features more than 10,000 full-length videos divided into nearly 75,000 content-specific video segments. These content-specific video segments are learning resources that enable ESL teachers as well as subject area teachers to integrate digital media in the classroom and further enhance language development in the content areas and support ELLs. In addition, we have also instituted a school wide reading and math on-line computer program, "iReady". iReady Diagnostic & Instruction" is proven to help students make gains in reading and mathematics and is based on the Common Core Learning Standards. "myON" is another new on-line computer program instituted at our school. "myON" is an on-line digital library with special features such as translated books, vocabulary look-up, lexile level diagnostic tests and books that are read aloud. "myON" is one of many tools used to increase student reading comprehension levels, allowing them to meet Common Core Learning Standards. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are no longer using the computer program, Ed Performance, as this program no longer suits our needs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All English Language Learners are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELLs are afforded the same eligibility to participate in after-school programs as any other students. Translated notices of all school programs are distributed to parents of ELL students in their native languages informing them of all programs. Title 3 programs staffed by certified ESL teachers are provided both before and after school Tuesday to Friday mornings from 7:25 AM until 7:55 AM and on Wednesday, and Thursday afternoons from 2:20 pm to 3:20. The purpose of all ELL instruction is to provide enhanced services for ELL students in the areas of listening, reading, writing, and speaking with the goal of lifting English ability to the level of proficiency as 9  quickly as possible. The Title 3 small group additional instructional period gives us a unique opportunity to focus on the areas of speaking and listening. A variety of instructional activities will take place including, creating and performing dialogue, discussion of academic and social issues, conversation about the news of the day, explicit guidelines on how to participate in main stream activities, and a general sharing of any and all concerns. In this way ELL students will be given the verbal and listening skills, in connection with their reading and writing skills, necessary for school success. In addition there is an after-school program and a Saturday program which include ELL students (Beacon and Project Achieve). ELL students participate in all after school teams and activities available to the mainstream population. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Programs will be enhanced for the upcoming school year. We have instituted a school wide computer-based Digital Media Content program, Discovery Education. Discovery Education streaming is a digital video-based learning resource scientifically proven to increase academic achievement. It features more than 10,000 full-length videos divided into nearly 75,000 content-specific video segments. These content-specific video segments are learning resources that enable ESL teachers as well as subject area teachers to integrate digital media in the classroom and further enhance language development in the content areas and support ELLs. In addition, we are also now using Academic Vocabulary Toolkit 1 & 2, a program which delivers effective instruction and enables ELLs to master high-use words for academic achievement. Included in the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit program is software that can be used for both pre-assessment and post-assessment. as well as formative and summative assessment. This program is in alignment with Common State Standards. In addition, we have also instituted a school wide reading and math on-line computer program, "iReady". iReady Diagnostic & Instruction" is proven to help students make gains in reading and mathematics and is based on the Common Core Learning Standards. "myON" is another new on-line computer program instituted at our school. "myON" is an on-line digital library with special features such as translated books, vocabulary look-up, lexile level diagnostic tests and books that are read aloud. "myON" is one of many tools used to increase student reading comprehension levels, allowing them to meet Common Core Learning Standards. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We do not presently have a Dual Language or Transitional Bilingual Program at this school . In our Free-Standing program at 158 there is a constant recognition of the importance of the continued development of native language skills. Native language is supported in our program by encouraging the use of it. ELLs are encouraged to complete some class writing assignments in both English and in their native language. Maintaining and improving reading fluency in the first language further improves reading ability in English. Therefore multi-lingual libraries are in all the ELL classrooms as well as in the school library. In addition, we have native language materials, dual language dictionaries and bilingual glossaries in content areas in the classrooms. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Services and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. Classroom curriculum and resources are age appropriate, diverse and multi-faceted. Content-based materials are used which are designed for the mainstream classroom and the ELL classroom. Grade level curriculum provide the basis for units of study. In addition, the library, the ENL classroom and all ELA classroom libraries contain high interest , age and grade level appropriate independent reading books as well as nonfiction leveled reading texts for ELLs. Furthermore, online reading computer programs such as "i-Ready" and "Myon" provide additional leveled and age and grade appropriate resources that ELL students can access and give further support. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Programs will be enhanced for the upcoming school year. We have instituted a school wide computer-based Digital Media Content program, Discovery Education. Discovery Education streaming is a digital video-based learning resource scientifically proven to increase academic achievement. It features more than 10,000 full-length videos divided into nearly 75,000 content-specific video segments. These content-specific video segments are learning resources that enable ESL teachers as well as subject area teachers to integrate digital media in the classroom and further enhance language development in the content areas and support ELLs. In addition, we are also now using Academic Vocabulary Toolkit 1 & 2, a program which delivers effective instruction and enables ELLs to master high-use words for academic achievement. Included in the Academic Vocabulary Toolkit program is software that can be used for both pre-assessment and post-assessment. as well as formative 0  and summative assessment. This program is in alignment with Common State Standards. In addition, we have also instituted a school wide reading and math on-line computer program, "iReady". iReady Diagnostic & Instruction" is proven to help students make gains in reading and mathematics and is based on the Common Core Learning Standards. "myON" is another new on-line computer program instituted at our school. "myON" is an on-line digital library with special features such as translated books, vocabulary look-up, lexile level diagnostic tests and books that are read aloud. "myON" is one of many tools used to increase student reading comprehension levels, allowing them to meet Common Core Learning Standards. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELL students and facilitate a smooth transition to Middle School, the Guidance Team conducts tours of the entire building in June for the incoming sixth grade classes. All feeder schools participate. Each school is scheduled for a separate date at which time a tour and orientation are held. ELL students can tour the building and acclimate to the new school environment. All ELLs have the support of their teachers, administration, parent coordinators, and the guidance counselors. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are offered the same language electives as all students. Spanish and Mandarin are the foreign language electives offered at our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development and Support for School Staff ENL teachers work closely with other pedagogues as well as with the administration. Staff development is ongoing. The training includes presentations, strategies, inter-visitations, activities, lesson-studies and the elements of a balanced literacy program with an emphasis on adapting it to the needs of ELL students. Assistant principals, subject area teachers, special education teachers, and paraprofessionals attend staff development sessions. Guidance counselors, school psychologists, speech therapists, secretaries and parent coordinators are also invited. ENL teachers attend ELA Department conferences and Team Meetings with content area subject teachers. Professional Development is provided on a weekly basis by administration and teacher leaders. In September a full day of staff development is held. Staff Development (2016-2017) activities and titles of workshops include: "What does evidence in the classroom look like? Domains 4 of the Framework for Teaching", The Scholastic Code X", the new curriculum designed to meet the City Wide Expectations for the 2016-2017 school year, a workshop using Skedula, a new online grading program adopted by the school this year, and a workshop on “Go Math”, a comprehensive mathematics program developed to support the Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. Again, in November of 2016 our teachers will participate in a full day of staff development. Titles of Workshops include: Differentiation and Intervention in a GO Math 6-8 classroom, Assessment and GO Math 6-8, Aligning the Instructional Focus to the Danielson Framework 1e, 3b, 3c by Analyzing Authentic Data and Modifying Instruction by Planning Multiple Entry Points 1  and Utilizing technology in the classroom. . ENL teachers meet with the content area teachers to work collaboratively to outline curriculum with a language development plan. There are several professional development workshops scheduled for the school year to fulfill the minimum 15% of Professional Development in ELL training and 50% ENL teacher training. Staff participate in ongoing, long-term staff development with a strong emphasis on the Common Core Learning Standards, high impact differentiated and academic language development strategies. During the year, ENL teachers confer with subject area teachers about their common students. In a series of ten formal Congruence Meetings, needs of individual students are discussed. ESL teachers meet with the content area teachers to work collaboratively to outline curriculum (based on the Common Core Learning Standards) with a language development plan. In September of 2016 our teachers participated in a full day of staff development. Teachers were instructed in the Citywide Expectations for the 2016-2017 school year and the implications for instruction were emphasized. Workshops were held in preparing teachers for first Baseline iReady Reading Assessment as well as Baseline Assessment Preparation for Content Area Teachers. Other workshops to teachers of ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards included NYSESLAT Anaysis-Determining Target ELLs and Intervention Strategies , City Wide Expectations and The Implications on the ELL Population, Danielson's Framework for Teaching, and Aligning the Curriculum in ESL to Meet the ELA Common Core Standards . Additionally, all teachers are trained in the "iReady" reading and math on-line computer program and its implications for ELL students. "iReady Diagnostic & Instruction" is proven to help students make gains in reading and mathematics and is based on the Common Core Learning Standards. "myON" is another new computer program on which all teachers receive professional development. "myON" is an on-line digital library with special features such as translated books, vocabulary look-up, lexile level diagnostic tests and books that are read aloud. "myON" is one tool used to increase student reading comprehension levels, allowing them to meet Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers were trained on the ELL applications of this program. Moreover, our certified TESOL teachers will present a series of workshops called "Strategies to Support ELL and Former ELL students". 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELLs transitioning from elementary to Middle School 158 are given a school orientation in May and June. These orientations assist ELLs as they transition from one school level to another. Guidance counselors are invited to attend professional staff development sessions at Middle School 158 and are thusly provided support to assist ELLs. Guidance counselors identify ELLs and other special needs students and create an appropriate schedule for them during the months of May and June. To further acclimate and assist in the transition, a "Sixth Grade Mixer" is held after school in September which enables all 6 th graders to socialize with each other in their new school environment. Guidance counselors also assist ELLs as they transition from Middle School 158 to high school. They provide information about Specialized High Schools, the Specialized High School exams as well as district high schools. ELLs as well as all 8 th graders are notified of citywide high school fairs being held and other pertinent information. . Guidance counselors are available to answer any questions and /or concerns of the student or parent. ELLs are also assisted with the dates of Orientations held for 8 th graders at their prospective high schools. Professional development is provided to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English Language Learners. Fifteen percent of the required professional development hours is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English Language Learners. All English as a New Language teachers receive a minimum of 50% of professional development hours which are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction. This includes a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Professional development requirements are further met in the form of co-teacher congruence meetings as well as ENL network meetings and "Turn-key" presentations to all staff. Professional development is ongoing throughout the school 2  year. All records of professional development activities such as agendas and attendance sheet are stored in a secure, accessible location in an "ELL Folder of Critical Documents" maintained by a licensed ESL pedagogue. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Individual meetings with parents of ELLs are held throughout the school year to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Our first meeting is in September for parents of newly enrolled ELL students where the NY State standards and all program options are discussed. This year our first meeting was held in September of 2016 for parents of ELLs. Included in this discussion were the Parent Survey and Program Selection form, our program overview, instructional strategies, activities, and programs being implemented to ensure that ELL students meet the standards and pass all required city and state assessments. In November of 2016 a second Parent Meeting will be held. Interim Assessment exams, report cards, Title III programs and the approaching ELA exam will be the focus. In February of 2017 a third Parent Meeting is held to discuss the remaining state exams and assess progress to date. Any issues and concerns of the parents are addressed at these meetings. Parents are invited to attend special programs for the ELL classes as well as attend special assemblies. All meetings are held with translators present to address issues and questions. In addition, parents can now receive immediate information regarding their child's education. Marie Curie is now using a new on-line grading program, Skedula, which gives parents access through Pupil Path to view their child's grades, attendance, class schedule, and progress on the Internet. Up-to-date academic information is available in nine languages. The Parent Coordinator is available to help parents utilize this resource. On-line communication with parents is also maintained throughout the school year via "Pupil Path". Furthermore, teachers are allotted time every Tuesday from 2:20 PM to 3:35 PM for Parent Communication. During this time teachers maintain communication with parents about their child’s progress. During this time, individual as well as team-teacher meetings with parents are held regarding specific issues pertaining to their child’s goals, needs, and progress. . Administrator’s, guidance counselors and translators are present at these meetings. . 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. EXPLANATION FOR QUESTION****2. Throughout the year, records are kept for annual individual meetings with ELL parents as well as outreach to ensure parent needs are accommodated in many ways. Notes from in-person meetings and phone calls are retained in student data binders. Anecdotal logs and e-mails between teachers and parents are maintained via Pupil Path. Throughout the year, administration distributes student progress reports which are signed by the parent and returned. These progress reports are kept in student data binders for critical documents. Likewise, copies of all correspondence are also securely stored in the "ELL Folder of Critical Documents" maintained by a licensed ESL teacher. 3. EXPLANATION. The Parent Teacher Association is an integral part of our school and is supportive and involved in school programs. The Parent Teacher Association holds conferences once a month. The parents and guardians of all ELLs are invited and encouraged to attend. The needs of the parents of ELL students are addressed at these meetings. Parents of ELLs have the opportunity to voice their opinions and concerns at these meetings as well as at the ELL Parent meetings. Letters and information regarding assessments, report cards, and promotional policy are translated into the main languages of our ELLs by the Translation Unit of the Department of Education. All meetings and Parent/ Teacher conferences are held with translators present to address issues and questions. In collaboration with the Parent Coordinator, the following workshops have been presented to the parents of our ELL and English speaking students. Parent and Student Workshop Series • Middle School Success Strategies • Parent’s Guide to 8th Grade Exit Projects • Communicating With Your Teenager • Internet Safety and Cyberbullying 3  • College and Career Readiness: The 21st Century Includes You! • High School Admission Process In addition, parents are invited to celebrate the New Year in our annual Lunar New Year celebration. Parents, students and staff of all cultural backgrounds gather together for a celebration of cultural diversity and exchange. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Henry Schandel, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Marie Curie Middle School School DBN: 26Q158 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Henry Schandel Title Principal June Dunn Assistant Principal Margaret Polizzi Parent Coordinator Joanne Coneglio-Vlaco ENL/Bilingual Teacher Monica Tarrao Parent Lisa Martelli Lori Kantor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Steve Epstein School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 26Q158 School Name: Marie Curie Superintendent: Danielle Giunta The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Assessment tools that were used to determine the written translation needs of MS158 were: -The Parent Coordinator, Margaret Polizzi, sent out a survey to all adult members of the school community including parents and professionals. -The OTELE report was run -HLIS forms reviewed -Guidance assessment 7  -Classroom teacher requests -PTA surveyed the parents to determine the home languages to increase parental involvement Based on these sources written translation needs were identified for Spanish, Korean, Chinese, Russian and Greek 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language The parents preferred languages for written and oral communication were: Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Chinese Korean Russian Spanish Greek 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents typically translated and distributed to families are: Monthly Principal newsletters. 8  All communication from the Chancellor School brochures Student progress reports Annual Handbooks Newsletters Calendars After school program information Parent teacher conference announcements Our website translates all communication including calendar of events and alcolades Pupil Path translates all communication to parents regarding student progress 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Face to Face meetings are translated as follows: We hire interpreters for Parent teacher conferences on November 17 th and March 16 th , Back to school night on September 16th, incoming 6 th Grade parent orientation in April. We use transmitters when needed for our parents to listen to what is being said in their own languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 9  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will continue to provide parents with all communication in their language in line with the Chancellors regulations. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We gather feed back from parents through e-mail and pupil path. We survey our parents every few months asking them the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services and if they are getting the most information from these services. 0 
