 28Q161 School Name: P.S. 161 ARTHUR ASHE SCHOOL Principal: JILL HODER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Arthur Ashe School 342800010161 Pre-Kindergarten through Grade Five 101-33 124 th Street, Queens, NY 11419 (718) 441-5493 School Number (DBN): 28Q161 (718) 441-6202 Phone Number: Fax: Patricia Hanley phanley@schools.nyc.go Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jill Hoder PaulitaCampbell Nadia Carter Patricia Hanley Ms. ShenaKhan N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 28 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mabel Muniz-Sarduy Superintendent: 90-27 Sutphin Boulevard, Jamaica, NY 11435 room 242 msarduy@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 557-2618 Phone Number: (718) 557-2623 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director: 82-01 RockawayBoulevard, Queens, New York 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 520-6743 Phone Number: (718) 281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jill Hoder PaulitaCampbell Nadia Carter N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Patricia Hanley Theresa Bennett Diana Drits *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ AP, SLT Chairperson Member/ RTI Coordinator Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KrystalLopez Abdul Mohamed ShenaKhan Alicia Mohammed N/A N/A Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview School Mission Statement   “Our mission at the Arthur R. Ashe Jr. School is to provide a comprehensive and nurturing learning environment where students will excel. Staff and parents will work collaboratively to improve the quality of standards-based instruction, while respecting the diversity of our school community, as we guide students into becoming more college-and-career ready.” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As we look forward to the 2018-2019 school year, P.S. 161Q, the Arthur R. Ashe Jr. School continues to be an inspiring and engaging school community. The data indicates that the Arthur Ashe School is a school which continuously strives to meet the needs of all of its students. As we embark on our eighteenth year as a school community, 14 of them with the same school principal at the helm, we note that we are proud of more than our academic success. We believe in “teaching the whole child”: Parents as Arts Partners Grant, Guitar Workshops, Dance and Fine Arts program, Price Waterhouse Coopers' “Earn Your Future” Program, Basketball Team, Career Day, Volleyball Team, Chess Club and special events such as Family Fun Night, and School-wide Barbecue, are features of our program that help to positively shape our children as much as our rigorous academic program. P.S. 161Q is a place where students truly enjoy learning. We provide multiple and varied ways for students to showcase their talents and enthusiastically participate in school activities. These varied approaches to educational endeavors emphasize the use of "real world connections" to make the learning both more motivating and more concrete. Our Pre-K to Grade Five student population consists of the following: 64% Asian or Pacific Islander, 9% Hispanic, 7% Black, 2% White, and 11% of mixed racial heritage. We have 743 students in our school, 12% of whom speak English as a new language, and 14% of whom have an IEP, and therefore receive special needs supports. Our school is barrier free and has an inclusion program in which students in District 75 are part of a general education classroom and receive support throughout the day, including a paraprofessional and are held to the same standards and tasks as the general education students. We have successfully transitioned to a full day Pre-Kindergarten program, with three full-time classes, one of which is an Integrated Co-Teaching class. Our ever-expanding Pre-K program will mean more time and resources will be devoted to our youngest learners in order to prepare them for the rigors of the CCLS in Kindergarten. Our staff is highly qualified to improve student achievement. Our Advance Measure of Teacher Performance ratings indicate that out of 42 teachers, 4 were rated “Highly Effective”, 37 rated “Effective”, and one of the teachers were rated “Developing”. 96% of our teachers have at least 9 years of teaching experience. In addition, our teachers' attendance is well above average at 95%. This indicates that our staff is satisfied with their working conditions and feel like they are valued within our school community. We pride ourselves on being a school where teachers are constantly striving to improve their instructional practices, to meet the needs of students of all ability levels, talents, learning styles, and cultures. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a unique challenge in that although many of our students are identified as English speaking, however they come from places around the world where their educational practices are different from those of New York City. In addition, although English is the official language in some countries, the language that is spoken at home is one that is native to their community. These circumstances are apparent in parts of the Caribbean. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  One of our goals for the 2017/2018 school year, in accordance with the Framework for Great Schools, related to improving the strength of our Family/Community ties by providing more and varied opportunities for parents to engage with their children's academic program and thus have a greater impact on our students' success. In addition to the 25 parent engagement events, we opened our classroom doors to parents on multiple occasions inviting them to be part of different activities throughout the year. We had a wonderful turnout during these activities and parents shared that this helped them better understand the demands of the CCLS. We plan to continue this work in the 2018/2019 school year, exploring more new and innovative opportunities to invite parents into our school so that we may help them understand the ever-changing curriculum, access data about their children's progress, and use the data to track their students' progress. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q161 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 708 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 7 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 30 24 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 78.7% % Reduced Lunch 13.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 8.8% 14.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 58.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YES NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 72 72 24 93.1% 5.4% 12.7% 5.9% 66.7% 9.9% 4 0% 8.6 68.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A YES YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As the 2017-2018 school year came to a close, in collaboration with members of our School Leadership Team, we conducted a comprehensive needs assessment. This included a school wide walk through by parents and staff. We looked at student work, noticed trends and patterns in student interaction in classrooms, and noted the use of technology. Qualitative and quantitative data were gathered and analyzed, including the following: Formative and summative test data, School Quality Snapshot, Teacher and Parent Surveys, ADVANCE reports, and informal discussions with parents, students, and staff. After much careful deliberation, we concluded that our Literacy program would need a stronger emphasis on specific reading skills, with a particular emphasis on making inferences based on text analysis and synthesis. 5A, RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION P.S. 161's strength as a school has always been our willingness and ability to work collaboratively to improve our Literacy teaching practices. We have noted an improvement in the students' ability to use higher-level vocabulary during student discussions and writing activities. While our ongoing efforts to increase mastery of the Common Core Learning Standards in Literacy have incorporated the use of both the Columbia Teachers College Reading and Writing Project curricula, we have found that the demands of the CCLS have continued to challenge many of our students, specifically in the areas of analyzing texts, synthesizing texts, and making inferences while reading developmentally appropriate texts. To this end, we will focus our instructional practices to include both fiction and non-fiction texts. Our students' goal will be to read leveled texts and respond to prompts that require them to analyze, synthesize, and make inferences during discussions and in writing. STRENGTHS: 2017-2018 PPO written feedback from the superintendent to the principal stated (11/06/17): You "ensure rigorous coherent instruction through your monitoring of curricula in all subject areas, which provide rigorous habits of critical thinking in a comprehensible way across grades and subjects." ELA MOSL results reflecting student growth from September 2017 to June 2018: 85.3% of students showed growth in trait number 3 (gr. 1-5) or trait number 5 (gr. K) in "Writing from Sources, using evidence to support your answer". 2017-2018 School Survey Results: 90% responded positively to questions about rigorous instruction. 96% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes participate in class discussions at some point. NEEDS: 3  NYS ELA Exam, as per School Quality Snapshot 2016-2017: 48% of our students met the state standards in ELA, as compared to 52% the previous year. This indicates a downward trend of 4% over the previous year, showing the need to reflect on teaching practices in order to improve and positively impact student growth. PPO Written Feedback, 1/31/17, "Areas of Focus": "Teacher pedagogy are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and Instructional shifts which are informed from the Danielson Framework Teaching. Continue to work with your English Native Language (ENL) classes to support teaching strategies including questioning, scaffolds, strategic multiply entry points and appropriate academic challenging tasks that demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products." 2017-2018 NYC School Survey: 76% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes respond to challenging questions in class. This is a decrease of 2% over the previous year's data. 76% of teachers reported that students build on each others' ideas during class discussion. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5A, RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION: By June 2019, 20% of Special Needs and English Language Learners in grades K-5 will demonstrate one year's growth in reading as measured by Teachers College Benchmarks and evidenced by TC running record data. Their assessed performance will indicate at least one year's growth. In addition, targeted students will reach and exceed that one year benchmark thereby moving up to the next performance level, i.e. moving from level 1 to level 2. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? See info below May2018 to Sept, 2018 See info below 1-2 teachers per grade, Literacy lead, TC Staff Developer (K-2, 3-5) 2 AP’s, Principal See info below Gen Ed Teachers, Special Ed Teachers, ENL Teachers  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). See information listed below. FIRST QUARTER: Research Based Instructional Programs: ● Grade Level Teacher Teams meet with Teachers College Staff Developers to plan curriculum units of study for the 2018-2019 school year. Curriculum adjustments are made at this time. The Reading Strategies Book Your Everything Guide to Developing Skilled Readers by Jennifer Serravallo will be the study text for Kindergarten through Grade 5. Already Ready is the text for Pre-K. ● Teacher teams utilize "Depth of Knowledge" maps created in 2017/2018 to identify units/lessons where a heavy emphasis will be placed on students synthesizing, analyzing, and making inferences. ● Teachers College Literacy: Teachers on grades Kindergarten through Five, during weekly grade meetings, plan collaboratively to ensure that daily lesson plans have multiple entry points and differentiated activities, to ensure access for all learners. ● myON flyers are sent home to families providing them with stop by step information on how to log into the system over the summer in order to access more than 7,000 digital books. myOn Blast Into Reading summer reading contest information is shared with all students and flyers are sent home to all families informing them of contest rules and prizes. Professional Development: ● Teachers meet in grade level teams to identify specific topics of interest and areas in which they desire support for upcoming cycles of professional development. ● During the September 2018 Faculty Conference, the Principal introduces teachers to the instructional focus and school goals 5  for the 2018-2019 year, with tentative action plans that are designed to achieve these goals. Teachers are given a preference as to which vertical team they would like to join. ● A “refresher course” on Webb’s Depth of Knowledge and the Hess Cognitive Matrix will be provided during the initial Faculty Conference Day in September. ● Teachers in grades K-5 will analyze the NYS Writing Rubric, NYS Release (Engage NY) questions, and revise units of study to reflect the rigor of upcoming assessments. Addressing Student Needs: ● Teacher teams continue to look at how to include multiple entry points in all lessons, and increase “checks for understanding”, so that all students, particularly those for whom English is a second language, can thrive and meet their potential as learners. Use of “buddy students” who can engage the “newcomer” in discussions in their native language as a bridge to expressing themselves in English. Use of visual aides such as Smart Board presentations with embedded videos, interactive writing, and other scaffolds are encouraged. ● Teachers will analyze their new class student data from 2017/2018, noting strengths and areas of student need. Teachers will set up class google docs identifying ELL students' language proficiency levels, Special Needs students' services and all students reading levels from the previous year. ● At beginning-of-year-conferences, “Highly Effective” teachers will plan dates to meet with administration to schedule inter visitations for their peers during the literacy instructional block . SECOND QUARTER: Research-Based instructional programs: ● TCRWP Literacy: Teachers teams meet on all grade levels to plan Read Alouds for TC Reading units of study. Professional Development: ● TCWRP Staff Developers will support teachers in their facilitation of accurate and complete running record data collection and analysis of running record data. ● TCWRP staff developer for grades K-2 will assist teachers in ensuring accurately leveled classroom libraries are accessible to all students. October, 2018-December, 2018 Computer Teacher PD Team Administrators Gen. Ed. Teachers, Special Ed Teachers, SETSS Teacher, ENL Teachers, 6  ● Lab sites are established for TC Reading, whereby teachers can view lessons modeled by TC coaches and make adjustments to their teaching practices. ● ELL teachers facilitate a 3 week cycle of professional development for teachers in grades K-2 focused on getting to know proficiency levels and research based classroom strategies to support ELL students at each level. Addressing Students’ Needs: ● Initial Teacher Effectiveness observations include emphasis on “Student Engagement”, Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric component 3C, to assess whether teachers are providing flexible grouping daily thereby supporting struggling readers. ● Administrative walk-throughs include focused “Data Dives” to look at classroom libraries to assess that books are accurately leveled and there is a large range of leveled texts available for students to select "Just Right" books for their baggies. ● PS 161 myON contest guidelines are created by the computer teacher and shared with all teachers, administration, and parent coordinator. Teachers share contest information with all students. THIRD QUARTER: Research-Based Programs: ● Teachers College Staff Developers will meet with teachers on each grade to support them in using running record data to plan small group instruction. ● ACHIEVE 3000 will be incorporated into ENL classrooms and RTI intervention classes, and after-school AIS programs; this provides differentiated non-fiction texts for reading and writing support. Professional Development: ● Teachers will receive updated training utilizing the “Teachers College Reading Proficiency Levels”. They will assess students' growth in reading and gather data, helping to define small group instruction. ● Teachers and administrators will receive training on the use and monitoring of students' progress, with the support of the ACHIEVE 3000 program. Meeting Students’ Needs: K-5 Gen Ed Teachers January 2019 to March, 2019 Principal Assistant Principals (Pre-K -2) (3-5) 7 ● Guided reading lessons will be implemented each week on all grade levels. FOURTH QUARTER: Research-Based Programs : Teachers Students April 2019 to June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Cabinet Members ● Teacher teams and school administrators will review data related to student growth in reading and review the curriculum/lessons/tasks to make any adjustments needed to ensure readiness of all students to continue to the next grade. ● Teacher surveys related to reading instruction will be created, distributed, and analyzed, in order to assess teacher satisfaction with the Teachers College Literacy program. Professional Development: ● Teachers will share out best practices (on Chancellor’s Conference Day), including use of new and motivating mentor texts, materials, and strategies to improve inferencing skills. Addressing Students’ Needs: ● Students will be given summer reading suggestions based on their current reading levels 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be offered throughout the school year focused on building families understanding of the CCLS, reading and writing units of study, and strategies which can be used at home to support students. In addition, classroom teachers will invite parents into their child's classroom throughout the year in order to be a part of reading and writing activities during specific units of study. First Quarter Parent Involvement: ● During Curriculum Night at Parent Teacher Conference in September of the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will conduct a myON reading program presentation for parents so that they will appreciate how accessible it is for students to choose and read texts using a computer or tablet at home or the library. Individualized logs of information will be shared with each family. ● Daily reading log expectations are shared with parents/guardians. Second Quarter Parent Involvement: ● During Parent Teacher Conferences in November, student reading levels and Teachers College benchmark information will be shared with parents. Strategies to support readers at the various levels will also be provided. 8  ● . Parents will be invited into K-5 classrooms during the literacy block for the purpose of gaining a deeper understanding of the CCLS, as well as strategies they can use at home to assist their children with reading and writing. ● . Information will be disseminated to all families regarding school wide myON reading competition. Third Quarter Parent Involvement: ● Parents will be invited to attend writing celebrations, sharing the experience with their child. ● Students will be encouraged to read with their parents daily, having conversation about what they have read. ● Parents will monitor the amount of time that their child spends reading at home nightly. ● Parents will be encouraged to contact their child's teacher, assessing their child's current needs and evaluating their progress. ● Parents will be invited to the school Scholastic Book Fair, putting more books in the hands of their children. Fourth Quarter Parent Involvement ● During Parent Teacher Conferences in May, parents will gain a greater appreciation for their child's progress in the area of reading and writing. ● Parents will be encouraged to apply for library cards for their children. At the same time, they will investigate programs available for their children during the summer months. ● Information will be distributed to parents informing them of the many free opportunities available to families in the summer months. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Goal A: Rigorous Instruction in Writing Personnel Principal 2 Assistant Principals 33 Classroom Teachers 1 SETSS Teacher 1 IEP Teacher 9  2 ENL Teachers 1 Parent Coordinator Substitute teachers for professional development (100 days) Instructional Resources Teachers College Leveled Library Books (Gr. K-5) Non-Fiction Texts (Grs. K-5) Scholastic Guiding Reading Texts Promethean boards Other Resources TCWRP Staff Developers Visits (30 days) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, at least 20 % of our targeted students will have moved the necessary number of reading levels plus one additional performance level in order to demonstrate more than one year's growth, as determined by Teacher's College benchmarks and evidenced by TC running record data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers College running record data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5B, SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. STRENGTHS: 2017/2018: School Quality Snapshot: Collaborative Teachers: 93% of survey participants responded positively to questions about Collaborative Teachers (District: 88%). 96% of teachers at our school say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school (City:88%) and 98% of teachers say that at this school teachers work together to design instructional programs (City: 93%). 2017-2018 (June 2018) Advance Measures of Teaching Practice Report: Out of 42 Teachers rated via the Teacher Effectiveness (ADVANCE) system 90% of teachers received a rating of effective or highly effective in component 3D, which included the element of student self-assessment (Students using "checks for understanding" strategies). GoMath End of Unit Assessments: From September 2017 to June 2018, students in grades K-5 made overall gains of 35.37 percent in their average scores. NEEDS: NYS Math Exam, as per School Quality Snapshot 2016-2017: 55% of our students met the state standards in Math, as compared to 59% the previous year. This indicates a downward trend of 4% over the previous year, showing the need for reflection on teaching practices in order to improve and positively impact student growth. GoMath End-of-Unit Assessments, Comparative September 2016 through June 2017 results: The most significant gap in percentage gains occurred with students on Grade Four, who demonstrated 29.25% improvement in their averages, as compared with the overall school average of 35.37%. This indicates that more support is needed for Fourth Grade students and the greater performance expectations on grade four. ADVANCE Teacher Effectiveness Data for Component 3C "Student Engagement", for which "grouping for differentiation" is a criteria: 19% of teachers received a rating of "Highly Effective" for student engagement, 72% received a rating of "Effective", and 19% received a rating of "Developing". Part 2 – Annual Goal 1  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5B, SUPPORTIVE ENVIRONMENT(Math): By June 2019, 50% of students in grades K-5 will master two major clusters in the Next Generation math standards where the teacher creates multiple resources (minimum of 3) that offer supports targeted to the needs of their students in order to fill in the learning gaps as evidenced by item analysis data reports from 2019 to 2018. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). FIRST QUARTER May 2018 to Sept. Research-Based Instructional Programs: K-5 Students Assistant Principals 2018 IEP Teacher Supportive Environment Team ● Teacher teams will meet to revisit the Math Standards and revise the Math Pacing Calendar and revise the GoMath curriculum to ensure lessons include opportunities for critical thinking by students. ● Grade level teacher teams will review Exemplar authentic tasks work from the previous year and create lesson plans to teach through the task. Professional Development: ● Teachers will receive professional development on the different components of Exemplars and how we can teach standards “through” the Exemplar program. ● Turnkey information from Borough Field Support Office Math Trainings attended by the team members with their colleagues. ● Teachers on Grade five will train their colleagues on grades three and four in the use of “Think Central” GoMath whereby students are assessed online and can access and track their data. ● Parent workshop completed by Supportive Environment team during Parent time on Tuesdays to show parents how to manuever the ThinkCentral Website. Meeting Students’ Needs: ● Each grade team will analyze the item analysis from the 2018 State Math test to determine the clusters of need. One cluster will be chosen to be the focus for the first half of the year. ● Teachers will assist students in looking at their 2018 State Test data or EOY data from the previous year to become self aware of their areas of need and focus. Based on their areas of need the 3  students will set goals for their math learning for the first half of the year. ● Teachers will create tools such as monitoring charts, manipulative choices, technology integration and other scaffolds to assist the students in achieving their goals. SECOND QUARTER: Research-Based Instructional Programs: ● The Supportive Environment team will collect sample work from each grade and track the progress on the identified cluster of need by analyzing Math problem solving work samples from the Exemplar program that addresses that skill. The team will then discuss the need for additional tools to be created to address the difficulties the students are having pertaining to that cluster. ● The Item Analysis from each Go Math unit test will be reviewed to check the mastery of the chosen math cluster. Professional Development: ● Teachers in all grades will implement the extensions to Go Math in Think Central. This includes Math on the Spot, Animated Math Models, Math Concept Readers, Student Interactive Edition and at home “tutorials” in targeted math skills based on the item analysis from the previous chapter. Meeting Students’ Needs: ● Multiple resources will be created to support classroom teachers with the chosen cluster. Teachers will implement these resources in the classroom to help the students master the identified cluster. These resources will include grouping of students, students working collaboratively to solve math problems, students will share out their findings from math problem solving activities, debates for different problem solving activities, scaffolds to assist students who show the need for additional assistance, charts for reference throughout the room and computer time to use online resources or games to reinforce the skills. ● The Supportive Environment Team will create a self monitoring tool for their students’ goals. Students will keep a Math tracking sheet to monitor their math progress and learning within the identified cluster. THIRD QUARTER: K-5 Students, Teachers October 2018 to December 2018. Assistant Principals IEP Teacher Supportive Environment Team December Assistant Principals, IEP Teacher, 4  Research-Based Programs: ● The Supportive Environment team will review the data from the Middle of the Year Go Math assessment to determine the success of the resources created for the first cluster of need. ● Teacher Teams will meet to discuss the need to redefine lessons for the first cluster of need for next year to ensure mastery going forward. K-5 Students, Teachers Parents Professional Development: 2018 to Supportive Environment Team March 2019 ● The Supportive Environment vertical team will meet with grade level teams and review the 2018 test data to discuss the second cluster of need that will be the focus for the second half of the year. ● A teacher survey will be created by the vertical team to gather qualitative and quantitative data to determine the effectiveness of the resources that were put into place for the first identified cluster Meeting Students’ Needs: ● Teachers will facilitate students reflecting on their goal from the first identified cluster. They will complete a self reflection sheet to determine their next steps. ● Teachers will assist students in looking at their data again from the 2018 State Test and previous year EOY data to become self aware of their areas of need and focus. Based on their areas of need the students will set goals for their math learning for the second half of the year. ● Teachers will create multiple resources to support classroom teachers with the second chosen cluster. Teachers will implement these resources in the classroom to help the students master the identified cluster. These resources will include grouping of students, students working collaboratively to solve math problems, students will share out their findings from math problem solving activities, debates for different problem solving activities, scaffolds to assist students who show the need for additional assistance, charts for reference throughout the room and computer time to use online resources or games to reinforce the skills. FOURTH QUARTER: Teacher Teams, K-5 students April 2019 to Assistant Principals, 5 June 2019 IEP Teacher, Supportive Environment Team Research-Based Programs: ● The Supportive Environment team will review the data from the End of the Year Go Math assessment to determine the success of the resources created for the second cluster of need. ● Teacher Teams will meet to discuss the need to redefine lessons for the second cluster of need for next year to ensure mastery going forward. ● Teachers will refine common grade level performance tasks that will include student choice. ● Math Fluency Festival will take place in the School Auditorium. Professional Development: ● Teachers will share out during teacher team/vertical team time the successes of the resources created for each cluster focused on to ensure that we have met our “Supportive Environment” goals. ● Teacher teams will review the current school data, reflect on the year’s lessons and discuss the success of their math instruction this year to adjust curriculum maps and pacing calendars. ● During Anniversary Day, teachers will share out the positive findings from the work this year and discuss potential next steps to push the math instruction within the building. Meeting Students’ Needs: ● Teachers will facilitate students reflecting on their goal from the second identified cluster. They will complete a self reflection sheet to determine their next steps. ● Teachers will assist students in looking at their data again from the 2018 State Test and previous year EOY data to become self aware of their areas of need and focus and the progress they made this year. ● Data analysis will be completed for the building comparing the end of year data from 2018 to the end of year data from 2019 to determine if the implemented resources were successful. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. First Quarter Parent Involvement:  A "Curriculum Night" Parent-Teacher event will occur in September of the 2018-2019 school year, allowing teachers to disseminate school goals and initiatives, placing a particular emphasis on Parent monitoring of student achievement. At this time Class Dojo, school website, teachers e-mail, GoMath “Think Central”, EdMoto, and other communication platforms will be introduced and their regular use strongly encouraged. CCLS will be reviewed and parent-friendly curricular calendars provided.  Open School Week will be supplemented by invitations for parents to visit classrooms to observe Math events, or attend Special celebrations at the end of Math Units. Staff members will be encouraged to plan and present Parent Workshops, sharing Math strategies thereby creating a home/school connection.  Monthly Parent Engagement time may include math tasks or math activities. Second Quarter Parent Involvement:  Parent educational workshops will be offered for parents of students in the grades K-5, to support use at home of “Think Central”, Class Dojo, and NYC School websites.  Teachers will be encouraged to invite parents into classrooms during monthly Parent Engagement Time. This will give parents opportunities to view math lessons, to learn the latest techniques, for example in “Long Division” or “Problem Solving”. In this way, parents will be better prepared to support their children’ learning at home. Third Quarter Parent Involvement:  Student-led conferences (on Parent-Teacher Conference Day/Night) will focus on students' math skills and their progress towards their chosen goal in the first half of the year. The students can share their tracking sheets with their parents and elaborate on how they have completed the tracking sheet.  Parents will receive communications informing them of testing information, tips for accessing and using Think Central, websites for math tutorials such as “Khan Academy”, as well as other supports. Fourth Quarter Parent Involvement:  All parents will receive grade-specific information regarding ways to practice skills at home during the summer months.  The Supportive Environment team will create resources for the families for each grade to help the students from the "summer slide." It will be presented in a Parent Workshop in May. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Goal B: Supportive Environment: Math/Data/Student Self-Assessment Personnel Principal 2 Assistant Principals 7  33 Classroom Teachers 1 Technology Staff Developer 1 SETSS Teacher 2 ESL Teachers 1 IEP Teacher 1 Computer Cluster Teacher 1 Parent Coordinator Instructional Resources GoMath Expendable Materials Exemplars Program Discovery Education Splash Math website Engage New York website Other Resources School Website revisions/updates *Materials for “Clubs”,: Guitar Club, Chess Club, Acting/Drama Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of students in grades K-5 will one major clusters in the Next Generation math standards where the teacher creates multiple resources (3) that offer supports targeted to the needs of their students in order to fill in the learning gaps as evidenced by item analysis data reports from the Go Math Mid-year test. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 8  Go Math Beginning of Year Go Math Mid-Year Go Math End of Year Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Collaborative Teachers: In the 2017-2018 school year, we utilized our extended day time on Mondays so that teachers participated in vertical teams and grade level teams. Each vertical team focused on a specific element of the Framework for Great Schools. All grade level teams met and delved into reading, writing, and math curriculum for the purpose of deepening their knowledge of the content and revising unit plans to ensure that critical thinking opportunities were included. Strengths: For the school year 2017-2018, 100% of teachers actively participated in either a vertical team or a grade level team. They had the opportunity to chose an appropriate group, based upon either an area of interest or a topic which they wanted to develop a keener understanding. Their research and investigative proposals provided the staff with alternative methods by which to address areas of academic need. 90% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with their colleagues at their school on professional development, as reported in the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. Needs: Teachboost Insights Reports, "Competency Matrix": 2% of teachers rated in Component 4E "Professional Growth" received a rating of "developing", while 58% received a rating of "effective". Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 0  By June 2019, 75% of collaborative teacher team work will be devoted to supporting teachers in gaining a deeper understanding of the progression of skills in literacy across grades, developing students’ ability to think critically, as measured by evidence of teacher teams’ google documents showing student work exemplars in a specific skill. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Each quarter, the team will prepare a Community Read that will incorporate a question that addresses one of standards/skills the team will be unpacking, allowing them to collect student work. The team will select exemplars for each grade level depicting the expectation of the standard. Teachers Students May 2018 to Sept. 2018 The four themes for the year will be: Making inferences about characters, Main Idea/Theme, Summarizing, and Author’s Purpose. Each Community Read selection will be chosen for its text features, applying it to one of these four skills. The class will learn to think deeply about the text and develop a thorough understanding of the writing. Students will be expected to analyze passages from the book to support their opinions and conclusions. There will be an emphasis on using supporting details to justify their thinking. Students will engage in conversation with their classmates, as well as making contributions to group discussions. Throughout this process, the children will continuously write about their interpretation of the book selection. FIRST QUARTER Research-based Programs: Next Generation Anchor Standard. The emphasis will be on determining central ideas or themes of a text and the students’ ability to justify their own conclusions, using details and support evidence. The focus will be placed on the reading skill: Main Idea/Theme. The Literacy Vertical Team will be provided with the Community Read prior to its distribution to the staff. They will read and discuss the text, identifying its relevant features. They will create a “road map” for all grades that will lead to a better understanding of Main Idea/Theme. This will be unpacked during grade level conferences. At the conclusion of the unit, teachers will submit students’ work to be evaluated by the Vertical Team. Principal, 2 Assistant Principals IEP Teacher 2  The Team will select exemplar papers that demonstrate a deep understanding of Main Idea/Theme. This will be the basis for a formal classroom lesson. Professional Development: Professional Development will be planned by the Vertical Team that augments the lessons that will be delivered in the classroom around the skill of Main Idea/Theme. They will collaborate with their colleagues to prepare activities and lessons that enrich the understanding of this skill. Meeting Students' Needs: SECOND QUARTER Research-based Programs: Teachers Students Oct. 2018 to Dec. 2018 Principal, 2 Assistant Principals IEP Teacher Inferring about characters ELA anchor standards Next Generation Standard 3 - Analyze how and why individuals, events and ideas develop and interact over the course of time. The focus will be placed on the reading skill: Inferring About Characters. A Community Read selection will be rich with character development and chosen with that skill in mind. The Vertical Team will read, analyze the characters and reach conclusions that are inferred and substantiated by details and supporting evidence from the text. The Team will provide each grade with suggested activities that will help students analyze how and why individuals, events and ideas develop and interact over the course of time. Clearly, this will look very different from grade to grade. The concept will be the same but the expectations for each grade will be more sophisticated as the students move from K - 5. Professional Development: Professional Development will be provided by the Vertical Team: Inferring About Characters. The Vertical Team will prepare 3 Teachers Students Dec. 2018 to March 2019 Principal, 2 Assistant Principals IEP Teacher potential lessons and activities that support the teaching of Inferring About Characters. They will have the opportunity to share this information with their colleagues during grade level conferences. The staff will receive this workshop prior to the beginning of the unit. Meeting Students' Needs: THIRD QUARTER: Research-based Programs: Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Learning Progression, Theme/Main Idea and Supporting Details Summarizing. NYS Next Generation Anchor Standard 3. Central ideas or themes of a text and analyze their development, summarize the key support details and ideas. Professional Development: Professional Development delivered by The Vertical Team. They will devote time to both the reading of the text selection, through the literacy lens of summarizing. They will work collaboratively to plan for the “next steps” for each of the grades from K - 5. The members will then share their literacy insights with their grade level colleagues during scheduled grade conferences, creating plans for its implementation into their classrooms. The focus of this Community Read will continue to be reinforcement of summarization. Meeting Students' Needs: Teachers will create specific tools for promoting independent study for students and will utilize them during small group instruction, as well as large group mini lessons. At the co`nclusion of the unit, the Vertical Team will once again readdress the work that has been done in the classrooms from January - March. They will gather writing drafts that summarize a story, as well as final projects. These summaries will be evaluated and distributed to their colleagues on their grade, reflecting on the Standard and comparing it to the students’ work. The 4 Teachers Students April 2019 to June 2019 Principal, 2 Assistant Principals IEP Teacher teachers will share the writing examples with their classes, looking at them as potential exemplars. When students have the opportunity to look at outstanding work done on a shared text, they are better prepared to self-evaluate their own work and make appropriate modifications to make their writing better. FOURTH QUARTER: Research-based Programs: Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Learning Progressions for understanding author's purpose. Author’s Purpose: NYS Next Generation Anchor Standard 6. Assess how point of view or purpose shapes the content and style of a text, drawing on a wide range of global and diverse texts. Professional Development: The focus of this Community Read unit will be Author’s Purpose. While interpreting a text, students need to consider the effect a book will have on a reader or possibly its investigation into societal norms. When a student identifies the reason why the text is relevant to him/her, it becomes a purposeful exercise. A book and its message can change a life and/or society. Therefore, it is crucially important that the student recognize the most essential messages embedded in the text and the intended effect that the writer wanted it to have on the reader. Understanding the Author’s Purpose is another means by which to look critically at text. There are a myriad of topics that a book may address: societal norms, challenges, simply entertaining, growing up, feelings that diminish your self-esteem. The potential list is endless. Authors dwell on these topics or others and address its relevance and its possible impact on the reader in their writing. The writer’s motive for writing the text can make a significant impression on the life and thinking of the reader. The Vertical Team will meet in February to do close reading of the selected Community Read for March - June. They will brainstorm, identifying the author’s purpose for writing the text. Since this skill is subject to a wide array of potential conclusions, there may be more than one reason why an author chooses to share his/her insights on a topic with the public. They will work collaboratively to find the author’s purpose that best explains the relevance of the text and the author’s commitment to sharing it with the public. They will prepare graphic organizers that will 5  support the students as they attempt to articulate the author’s purpose and its impact on the reader. They will evaluate the students’ ability to meet the Standard for this skill. Members of the Vertical Team will meet with their colleagues to prepare lessons for the teaching of author’s purpose. Since this is more abstract than some of the other skills, it will require “thinking outside the box” to create plans that will support this work. Graphic organizers may be helpful - searching for relevant details from the text to justify their conclusions. Meeting Students' Needs: 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited into classrooms periodically thoughout the year to witness the implementation of critical thinking and higher order skills. In addition, workshops will be provided by staff members that will support parents in their child's educational endeavours. First Quarter Parent Involvement: Parents will be invited to the classroom for the culminating discussion around the First Quarter Community Read. They will have the opportunity to view the book, listen to the students’ analysis of the text, and even contribute to the discussion. The children will be encouraged to take the book home, read it to their parents, and write a response to literature. Second Quarter Parent Involvement: Parents will be encouraged to attend the culminating lesson around the Community Read selection. They will have the opportunity to listen to the students’ thinking, making inferences about characters events or ideas. The parents will be able to model their conversations with their child at home after witnessing the complexity of the dialogue in the classroom. Third Quarter Parent Involvement: Parents will have the opportunity to evaluate their own child’s writing about reading, comparing them to outstanding examples of summarization. When families become more aware of the importance of this skill, they are better prepared to talk about books with their child. This concept can be applied to almost any text. Fourth Quarter Parent Involvement: 6  Parents will have the opportunity to read their child’s explanation of author’s purpose and how it has affected his/her life. They will discuss the text with their child at home and challenge their student to justify his/her conclusions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal 2 Assistant Principals 33 Classroom Teachers 1 SETSS teacher 1 IEP teacher 1 12:1:1 teacher 2 ELL teachers 6 Cluster Teachers: 1 Science, 1 Art, 1 Dance, 2 Physical Education, 1 Computer Books: Copies of "Writing Strategies Book: Your Everything Guide to Developing Skilled Writers" and "The Reading Strategies Book: Your Everything Guide to Developing Skilled Readers" by Jennifer Seravallo will be distributed to all teachers. Expendable Materials: Binders, Notebooks, Chart Paper, markers, file cards, and other expendable materials for "Student-Engaged Assessment" PD and student data "trackers" Online Resources: Pinterest (free) TEACHBOOST SITE LICENSE ACHIEVE 3000 SITE LICENSE MY ON Online Literacy Program GoMath "Think Central" Promethean Boards Activinspire 7  Discovery Education Exemplars Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of Progression of Skills maps with samples of student work will be completed and integrated into DKC maps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Agendas showing plans for each vertical team meeting and maps of Progression of Skills with samples of student work. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The principal of P.S. 161Q has been in the position for 12 years. She has consistently received PPR ratings of over 90%. Her background before becoming a principal was in professional development, and she continues to place a high priority on the professional growth of her teachers, as well as her administrative staff, and provides support to administrators in other schools. Under her tutelage, teacher leadership has flourished. One of our identified goals will be to make professional growth a focus, as well as placing more emphasis on teacher feedback during the evaluation process. The data support this, as follows: Strengths: According to the PPO feedback for the 2016-2017 school year, the principal was evaluated as "Effective" or "Highly Effective" in all observed Quality Review Components: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3. 1.4. 2.2. 3.1, 3.4. 4.1. Written feedback to the principal from the superintendent stated, "You communicate effectively your expectations which lead to the connection to the path of college and career readiness for all students including our SWDs and ELL students. You consistently and systematically communicate a unified set of high expectations for all students and provide a clear, focused, and support for all adults, students and family across your school." 2015-2016 Quality Snapshot/School Survey Results: 96% responded positively to the questions about Effective School Leadership at P.S. 161. (Will be updated when we receive 2016/2017 data in August.) Needs: 2015-2016 Teachboost Insights "Teacher's Next Steps" Report: Next steps were tagged as complete only two times. Teacher "next steps" were not included in 100% of reports. End-of-Year Conference Teacher reflections: Qualitative data indicates that the majority of teachers would like to participate in the process of offering feedback and tracking their own goals with their supervisor. Part 2 – Annual Goal 9  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will discuss and reflect on their lessons with a member of the school administration team as a post observation conference reflecting on individual growth mindset and how they internalize the school goals and how the school goals are aligned and evident in their lessons. Thereby establishing continuity and uniformity throughout the school towards meeting the school goals, as evidenced by observational data through Teachboost. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? FIRST QUARTER Research-based programs: Teachers May 2018 to Sept. 2018 Principal, 2 Assist. Principals Principals and Assistant Principals will meet with Teachers during the End-Of-Year conferences to reflect on the year's professional growth and generate some initial ideas for teacher's goals for the 2017-2018 school year. During the September Initial Planning Conferences, teachers will review the previous year's student and teacher evaluation data, including NYS ELA and Math scores and decide on two/three goals (at least one of which will involve student data, and one will involve personal teacher growth) for the 2018-2019 school year. Professional Development: During Monday afternoon meetings with the principal and meetings with the assistant principals during Grade PD, teachers will discuss protocols and norms for providing feedback to their supervisors during the observation process. Meeting Students' Needs: Administration will encourage teachers to have at least one goal that pertains to meeting the needs of SWD, ENL, Level 1 and 4, and Gifted students. In September grade level PD meetings, grade leaders will share out new ideas for providing feedback to their supervisors during the observation process (online via Teachboost e-mails, etc.) 1  SECOND QUARTER Teachers October 2018 to December 2018 Principal, 2 Assist. Principals Research-based Programs: Teachboost/Advance reports will offer insights into teachers' progress towards meeting their goals. Teachboost/Advance Feedback will be included in the Teacher Evaluation process between supervisors and teachers. Professional Development: Supervisors will attend any available training regarding Teacher Effectiveness and use this as a basis for professional development grade meetings. Teachers will begin providing feedback on their observation reports to their supervisors, in response to Cycle One and Cycle Two observations. Supervisors will review and respond to teachers' comments, creating a "feedback loop" in Observation/Teacher Growth process. Meeting Students' Needs: Teachers continue to make student data analysis, and insights gained from it, as part of their cycle two evaluation process. THIRD QUARTER: Research-Based Programs: Teachboost Insights and Advance School Level reports will determine if more initiatives or PD are needed to promote the use of teacher self-reflection during the Teacher Effectiveness observation process. Professional Development: Differentiated professional development; during grade meetings, or in small groups or one-to-one, will be provided to teachers based on their needs for support as we transition to a more teacher-directed observation process. FOURTH QUARTER: Research-based Programs: Cycle four observations, and End of Year teacher evaluation conferences allow teachers and administrators to review data and reflect on the changes made to the observation process through teacher-to-supervisor feedback. Teachers December 2018 to March 2019 Principal, 2 Assist. Principals Teachers April 2019 to June 2019 Principal, 2 Assist. Principals 2  Professional Development: Teachers will meet with their grades and decide on any further insights/changes they would like to add to the observation process and sharing these out at a Chancellor's Conference Day workshop. Meeting Student Needs: Data will be analyzed by Vertical Teams and the Cabinet/Professional Development Team to determine whether teacher self reflective comments has supported "meeting students' needs". 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. First Quarter Parent Involvement: In collaboration with the parents of the SLT and PTA executive board members, goals will be established and revised. Goals will be presented and discussed with parents during September PTA meeting. Second/Third Quarter Parent Involvement: Progress monitoring of goals data will be presented and discussed at February SLT meeting. Conversations at monthly PTA meetings with approval from SLT and consultation of Executive Board will take place regarding school goals. Fourth Quarter Parent Involvement: SLT members will participate in a school wide walk through and review of data in order to assess if goals were met. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1 Principal 2 Assistant Principal 44 Teachers 3  Online Resources: Teachboost System Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 Teach Boost observation data will reflect all completed observations include a post observation conference where discussion of the lesson and alignment of school goals took place. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachboost Insights "Teachers Next Steps" Reports, and Administrative notes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. When surveyed, our parents routinely state that they are "satisfied", or "highly satisfied" with "Community Ties" overall and specifically our communication of students' performance and with teacher support. Parent surveys indicate, however, that more variety of parent events and opportunities should be offered in order to accommodate many different parent needs and schedules. Parents in particular have requested that Parent workshops should be scheduled at night. This has a multitude of challenging obstacles. A proposal made in an SLT meeting suggested that Parents to deliver workshops to each other, encountered difficulties. Better collaboration between staff members and parent leaders toward creating and delivering parent workshops should be developed. STRENGTHS: 2017/2018 School Survey data: 96% of families and teachers say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child as compared to 86% the previous year. Parent-Teacher Meetings: 100% of teachers met their 2017-2018 goal of having 1:1 contacts with Parents regarding their children’s progress throughout the school year, during the Tuesday afternoon Parent Contact time, as well as parent teacher conferences. The 2017-2018 P.S. 161 School Calendars indicated that the following parent involvement events were offered in addition to workshops, PTA Meetings, SLT meetings, and Parent-Teacher Conferences (four of which are required by the DOE): Open School Week parent visits to classrooms, Kindergarten Orientation, Pre-K parents invited to monthly classroom celebrations, Coffee with the Principal, Science Fair, Book Fair, Dramatic Interpretations of Literature, Career Day, Award Assembly/Dance Performances, Parent Engagement Activities in the classrooms (quarterly). NEEDS: 2017/2018 School Survey data: P.S. 161 scored at or above 90% for parent responses in all but one of the Strong Family- Community Ties categories. 81% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school, (for example, spent time helping in classrooms,helped with school-wide events, etc.). 2016-2017 Parent Data Binder: There were 24 Parent Workshops/Activities offered, as compared to 35 in the 2015-2016 school year. Total attendance at Parent Workshops/Activities was 416, as opposed to total attendance of 318 in the year prior. So while we increased our attendance at workshops/activities, we decreased the number of workshops/activities offered. 5  School Quality Guide 2016-2017: 86% of teachers agree or strongly agree that at their school parents/guardians are invited to visit classrooms to observe the instructional program. In this category we fall below the district average which is 93% and the city average which is 91%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5E, STRONG FAMILY AND COMMUNITY TIES: By June 2019, we will continue to offer parents at least 10 opportunities for them to be engaged in their child’s learning environment through workshops, open classroom events, and a monthly PS 161 newsletter as evidenced by the Parent Engagement binder containing sign in sheets and copies of the newsletters. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). May 2018 to Sept. 2018 FIRST QUARTER: Research-Based Programs: ● Teachers will use “Class Dojo” (K-2) and Edmodo (3-5) Apps in order to communicate with parents daily regarding curriculum, homework, assessments and direct contact regarding student progress. ● The administration and the parent coordinator will read and discuss a professional text, TBD. Professional Development: ● Each grade will conduct a professional development session for parents on the last Tuesday of each month. ● Parent orientation for Kindergarten and Pre-K will take place the first day of school. ● Grade-level meetings will be help to prepare for the first Parent-Teacher Conference “Curriculum Night”. ● Notifications and important information will be disseminated on our school website where parents can access information at times that are most convenient for them. Meeting Students’ Needs: ● Parents can view Webinars on www.pta.org offering suggestions as to how to help their children with special needs, and also will provide a guide with information and tips for families new to special education. ● Create and provide parents with a calendar that has two months at a time on it to help parents prepare for future events. 7  Oct. 2018 to Dec. 2018 . ● Conduct a middle-school articulation workshop for the parents of 5th grade students. SECOND QUARTER: Research-Based Programs: ● Data collected from parents using Go-Math Think Central, Class Dojo, Edmodo and the school website as determined by “hits” will be analyzed to determine how many parents are regularly interacting with the resources being provided to them. ● Teachers across all grades will continue to present professional development sessions for parents in their chosen area of expertise. Professional Development: ● Classroom-specific suggestions from current professional literature will be distributed to all staff. They will turn-key information at grade-level PD meetings in anticipation of the November Parent-Teacher conferences. ● SLT Team will receive district level training. SLT Team members will disseminate pertinent information at the following PTA meeting. Meeting Students’ Needs: ● Training on “How to Read and IEP” and other parent workshops related to supporting students with special needs, will be given. ● ENL teachers will give training for ELL parents focusing on how to offer academic support to their children at home, (in their native languages whenever possible). ● Parents will receive information regarding units of study from PS 161 newsletters. ● Guidance counselor and grade 5 teachers will conduct a middle-school articulation workshop for the parents of 5th grade students. 8  Jan. 20189 to March 2019 April 2019 to June 2019 THIRD QUARTER: Research-Based Programs: ● Professional Development: ● Meeting Students’ Needs: ● FOURTH QUARTER: Research-Based Programs: ● Professional Development: ● Meeting Students’ Needs: ● 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Councilman Wills, local library services, Price Waterhouse Cooper, FDNY, Smile NYC, Department of Transportation, send representatives to the school to provide information and strategies that support our parents at home. First Quarter Parent Involvement: ● “Coffee with the Principal” meetings begin once per month, whereby Parents are invited to share concerns with the Principal and Parent Coordinator. This initiative engenders trust and better home/school relationships in a non-threatening, intimate environment, with the Principal and our parents. ● Ms. Knowles, our Parent Coordinator, distributes passwords and trains parents on use of the NYC Schools Account. ● Parent Handbook, available in multiple languages will be created including outside resources, tutoring services, field trips. ● Links on the School’s website, including “Parents Guide to Student Success” will be available to parents. ● A Schedule for Teacher-Parent Workshops, utilizing the expertise and specialized training of staff members, is created. 9  Second Quarter Parent Involvement: ●Parents will be asked to volunteer at PTA and SLT meetings They will potentially lead a workshop for other parents. Teachers or administrators will work as a team with individual parents to help them prepare their workshops, to be given during the day, at night before PTA meetings, or parent-teacher conferences. ●Parents will be invited into school to visit classrooms during classroom celebrations periodically over the course of the school year. ● During Parent-Teacher Conference Nights, Parents will be recruited to greet and interpret for families whose first language is other than English. Third Quarter Parent Involvement: ● Parent volunteers will continue to lead “Parent-to-Parent” workshops at PTA meetings and during the school day. Fourth Quarter Parent Involvement: ● Parent volunteers will look at the results of the Special Needs Parent Survey and in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator and the Principal’s Cabinet, develop plans for the following year; offering support and guidance to Special Needs parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Goal E: Parent and Community Engagement Personnel Principal 2 Assistant Principals 44 Teachers IEP Teacher Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Volunteers: PTA Exec. Board SLT Members 0  Other Parent Volunteers (recruited during PTA meetings) Instructional Resources Professional Books for staff Beyond the Bake Sale Parent Handbooks (paper and printing) Expendable materials for Parent Workshops (Math, Writing, Technology, etc.) Other Materials (Tech – Web-based programs, etc.) Class Dojo Think Central Edmoto NYC Schools Global Connect Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, our Parent Workshop Attendance Binder will indicate a 6% increase in attendance at Parent Workshops, PTA Meetings, and Parent/Teacher conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Workshop Attendance Binder. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Universal Screener- Running Records Spring 2018NYSELA Assessment Data Mathematics Go Math Assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Wilson/Fundations Small Groups During the day Recipe for Reading One-to-one instruction After-school AIS Program At-home self-guided use of MyOn Spotlight on Comprehension Guided Reading Test-Ready Multiple Entry Points in all lessons Small group Go Math RtI Spring 2018NYSMathematics Assessment SplashMath Performance Tasks Science FOSS Assessments Social Studies Pre and Post Assessments for each Unit of Study Teacher Observations Small group activities to reinforce the lessons Mulitiple Entry Points for all lessons Passport to Social Studies Multiple Entry Points for all lessons Small Group During the day 1:1 After-school AIS Program At home self-guided ThinkCentral Tutorials Small Groups During the day Small Groups During the day 2 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Learning Style Surveys The child is referred to the PPT team from the teacher and the team determines which at-risk services would benefit the child most At-risk counseling Small Groups During the day One-to-one instruction At-risk speech Rti groups At risk SETSS 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 25 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Additional counseling and AIS support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Resumes from college students majoring in Education are reviewed and filed. Positions are also posted on the DOE "Open Market" website and a Hiring Committee is formed and staffed on a voluntary basis. When a vacancy for a position is expected, Hiring Committee meetings take place after school or during the summer vacation. Resumes, interview questions, sample answers, and interview procedures are created and/or reviewed at these meetings. A written response to an essay question, an interview , and a model lesson are part of the interview process. When possible, a model lesson is conducted by the person being interviewed. Consensus must be reached by committee members before a candidate is chosen to fill a position. Upon being hired, new teachers participate in a New Teacher group that meets one morning per week in order to provide support and guidance. All new teachers participate in the teacher-selected and teacher-guided professional learning experiences at least once per week. In addition, selected teachers are sent out for training on professional development days, in collaboration with Columbia Teachers College Reading Writing Project, as well as other Queens South BFSC workshops, as needed. New Teachers are partnered or “ buddied ” with a "highly effective-or-effective"-rated veteran teacher to give grade specific guidance and training about curriculum, classroom management, and best teaching practices. Inter-visitations are arranged through the administrative staff. New teachers are also explicitly trained in understanding and using the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric in order to improve their teaching practices. New teachers are encouraged to continue their professional growth by participating in outside organizations/events such as college or UFT classes, museum workshops, trips, the Teachers-Pay-Teachers website. Our Professional Learning program to support the new teachers is outlined as follows: ● All new teachers are assigned to a Vertical Team which meets once per week on Mondays after school. In these Vertical teams, teacher representatives from each grade from Kindergarten through Grade Five meet to look at students work, analyze data, and plan professional development around a particular curricular area. These five areas are as follows: Literacy, Math, Collaborative Teachers, Parent Involvement and Effective School Leadership. The teacher gets to choose his/her specialty and contributes to the meetings, as well as bring back professional development plans for his/her grades. 6  ● Teachers plan professional development experiences for their grade level colleagues. For example, a Grade Four Math specialist will gain Professional Development ideas from the Vertical Team meetings and then plan an experience for his Fourth Grade colleagues, to be presented during weekly grade professional development meetings. Throughout the school year, each teacher will have the opportunity to lead professional development multiple times per year. Each teacher benefits from professional development experiences provided by colleagues. Our Cabinet/Professional Development team meets weekly to analyze data and make decisions about a Professional Learning Calendar, curriculum planning opportunities, and additional professional development opportunities, as the needs arise. ● Inter-visitations of colleagues, on the same and different grades, are encouraged. It is expected that a new teacher will participate in at least four visits to another teacher’s classroom per year. ● New Teachers participate in teacher surveys where they may have further voice in influencing decisions regarding Professional Development topics and planning. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All classroom teachers have daily preparation periods that are shared with colleagues on their grades to share grade-specific professional learning experiences, as well as collaborative planning opportunities. Vertical Teams will meet once every other week after school for 80 minutes. Their work is organized in five areas: Literacy, Math, Parent Involvement, Collaborative Teachers, and Effective School Leadership. One teacher from each grade will represent his/her grade at these meetings. Students' work and data will be analyzed making note of trends upon which to base future professional development, tailored to each grade. Teachers will bring the professional development schedule back to their grades. Specific "Themes and Topics" will be developed during four-to-six week cycles and facilitated by staff members with specific training in these areas. Members of the School's Professional Development Team, including supervisors and representatives from each grade and "specialists" such as our Science Teacher and SETSS Teacher, "cycle in " to the teacher-directed Professional Development as needed. They will offer professional learning on new curricula, new DOE mandates, and research-based teaching practices. Analysis of Teacher surveys, as well as analysis of ADVANCE data, will offer insights into possible new directions in professional learning. The Principals' Cabinet will continue to meet once per week to analyze data within and across grades and in different curricular areas, in order to create systemic professional learning initiatives and to "tweak" the existing Professional Learning Plan. The Schoolwide Professional Development Team will meet once per month to look at student work across grades and to allow all voices to be heard and input from teacher representatives. Team members gain insight into specific grade level challenges, as well as accomplishments, to which they may not have normally been exposed. Overall, the collaborative nature of our planning for professional learning experiences provides teachers with a sense of support as well as ownership of their own professional growth. Teacher leadership is encouraged and recognized. Teachers see professional learning as their right and their privilege and seek out additional professional learning opportunities, including classroom intervisitations. 7  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Pre-K teachers are invited to professional learning experiences, during Chancellor’s conference days to build their knowledge in regards to "Pre-K Explore" units of study and "Building Blocks" curriculum. In addition, they attend PD provided by the Department of Education (DOE), and Queens South BFSC related to having high expectations for Kindergarten students. Parents of Pre-K students attend workshops given by the Parent Coordinator our early childhood social worker, and our assistant principal in order to help them prepare their children for Kindergarten. Books and other materials are distributed to the Pre-K parents at “moving up” time, so that they may work with their children over the summer prior to starting Kindergarten. In addition, Pre-K parents have access to the Building Blocks (web-based) program, which ensures that teachers, parents, and students are connected and aware of standards-based skills requirements and progress. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers on each grade , and in each “specialty area”, i.e. “Science” are part of the monthly Professional Development Team meetings, where they have a voice in the selection of assessments, school curricula, and school professional development topics. Customized teacher surveys; regarding selection of curricula and their corresponding assessments are created, distributed, and analyzed on a yearly basis. The MOSL team, consisting of classroom teachers and other teacher “specialists” meet according to the mandates of the DOE, to select assessments that will be used in teachers’ overall ratings. Vertical Teams meet weekly on Monday afternoons to discuss matters related to assessment in their respective disciplines/areas. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible 8  for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5, part 1 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 392,674 71,767 12,366 0 4,103,408 x x x N/A x Section 5, part 2 Section 5, part 1 Section5, part 2 Section 5, part 1 Section5, part 2 Section 5, part 1 Section 5, part 2 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 9  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) , 2016-2017 Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 161, The Arthur Ashe Jr. School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcome members of the school community. P.S. 161’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school and is also available in the SLT Binder. 1  3. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S. 161 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement levels, in literacy, math and use of technology; through “Parents are Teachers, Too” program workshops that are held twice per month.  Providing parents with the information and training needed for them to become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children through engagement in the School Leadership Team (SLT) and the Parent Teacher Association (P TA) Executive Board. This is done in consultation with the School Administration. Relevant information is disseminated during PTA meetings, Parent Teacher Conference days, schoolwide events, and through continuous and varied methods of Parent Communication including Curriculum Nights, Web-based academic programs, Global Connect Blackboard, letters, teacher e-mails, and Class Dojo. Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership helps to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress this is a topic discussed in an ongoing basis by SLT and PD team members.  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; during   content-specific parent workshops and during PTA meetings. Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings, and other activities in languages that parents can understand. This is done via the school’s website, parent handbook, letters, and other varied methods of communication.  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parent input to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. This is advised through SLT Meetings and is planned during Professional Development meetings. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, reviewing, and evaluating the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program, as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan including the 2  implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact during SLT meetings.  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills during Title I Parent meetings, and subsequent SLT meetings.  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact, as overseen by the Title I Parent and the School Leadership Team. Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; as included in SLT agendas for all SLT meetings.  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator, staff members, parents, or other members of the school community, will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations, Literacy, accessing community and support services, and technology training; to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home.  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system; e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Quality Snapshot, Quality Review Report, New York City School Survey Report.  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program. Include information about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program(s), and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act. Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times (including morning or evening) to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to voice their own suggestions.   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events, as needed.  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help, as evidenced by our Annual Family Fun Day, Fluency Festivals, and other Parent-School events. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; organized by the Parent Coordinator.  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year.  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. Supporting or hosting Family Day events.   Continuing access to the Parent Resource Center, available in the Parent Room (Rm. 129).  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers, such as Learning Leaders, as budget allows.  Providing online access to student data, as well as written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; as decided upon, planned, and disseminated by each Grade.  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; as evidenced by the P.S. 161 School Website, which is connected to the DOE website, as well as class newsletters sent home at least once per month. 3  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practical in the languages that parents can understand, as funded by the PTA and ordered each year by our School Business Manager. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 161, The Arthur Ashe School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. 1. School Responsibilities I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  Using academic learning time efficiently, as evidenced by ADVANCE reports as well as “Data Dives” reports.  Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; as evidenced by our School Survey results.  Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards, as evidenced by our Quality Review Report, School Snapshot, and School Report.  Offering high quality instruction in all content areas, as evidenced by the reports itemized above.  Providing instruction by highly-qualified teachers , and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, as outlined above. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester, during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed. In addition, we are adding a requirement that each classroom teacher will conduct six more one-to-one conferences specifically about individual children’s progress by phone, or in person, by the end of June 2018.  Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program, to inform them of the school’s Title I status, funded programs, and their right to be involved and to vote on at least one important Family Event where the entire school community is invited and engaged in academic/artistic/multicultural activities.  Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, morning and evening and providing more opportunities to communicate via phone, e-mail, and various Internet interfaces.  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services, in order to ensure participation in the child’s education and emphasizing translation services during one-to-one conferences about specific children’s behavioral or academic challenges. 4   Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings, and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format, and to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand; via both Global Connect Blackboard, calendars, school website, notices, and letters. Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate, and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy, and this Compact; with support during the PTA and the School Leadership team meetings.   Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information, by educating and inviting parents to inform themselves via Classroom Dojo, Think Central, MyOn, and other technology-based programs.  Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year at an SLT and PTA meeting, prior to final CEP approval.  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Ensuring that staff has access to interpretation services, in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; as overseen by our two ENL teachers.  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member via letters home, individual teacher conferences, and other communications.  Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class and to observe classroom activities via outreach from our Parent Coordinator, as her budget allows.  Planning activities for parents during the school year; such as Parent-Teacher Conferences, workshops in the Parent Room and special events made available through grant and Arts programs. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Creating a safe, supportive, and effective learning community for students and a welcoming, respectful environment for parents and guardians with high expectations discussed at Faculty Conferences, professional development meetings, and other meetings involving teachers and administration.  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their children’s progress, by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) and ensuring that students know their own goals and that they can communicate them to each other, their teachers, and their parents. Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community, including professional learning experiences and teacher inter-visitations. Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents and as supported by our Parent Coordinator, PTA Executive Board, individual grades, and community-based organizations.    Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy, as supported and monitored by the School Leadership Team.  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs according to information available in the main office and in the Parent Room. 2. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 5   Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent. This is communicated to parents in the beginning of the school year via parent letter, and followed up by letters from the attendance committee, school administrators, and attendance teachers (as needed).  Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age, as discussed in PTA meetings and also by our guidance counselor.  Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary, as outlined in teacher-created policies outlined in letters distributed in the beginning of the school year.  Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes), as outlined  in grade specific parent letters sent home in the beginning of the school year. Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games, as communicated in PTA meetings and additionally in one-to-one parent conferences when necessary.  Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time.  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; as communicated when Discipline Code, letters, and compacts are distributed to the home.  Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits, as encouraged by the Parent Coordinator and at PTA meetings.  Participate in the decisions relating to my child’s education, as encouraged by the SLT and by the Executive Board at PTA meetings.  Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district as encouraged by the aforementioned home-school communications.  Respond to surveys, feedback forms, and notices when requested as emphasized at parent-teacher conferences.  Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact as part of the School Leadership Team.  Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department; to learn more about teaching and learning strategies, whenever possible.  Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve on advisory groups, such as Title I Parent Committees and School or District Leadership Teams; as encouraged by communications sent by the PTA Executive Board and disseminated by the aforementioned communication methods. Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; by attending all parent teacher conferences requested by the teacher and using at least one technology-based method of communication offered by the school.   3. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities  Attend school regularly and arrive on time, as promoted in morning announcements, and reinforced through late notices, as well as rewards and certificates.  Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time, as outlined in teacher created letters.  Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions, as developed in “rules” discussions in each classroom in the beginning of the school year. Show respect for myself, other people, and property; as reinforced by the “Character Counts” program.   Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully, with the support of Guidance and peer mediation.  Always try my best to learn, as supported by positive reinforcement such as “Student of the Month” awards, Character Counts “dollars”, and specific awards certificates as well as “Graduation” awards and honors. 6  7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Arthur Ashe School This school is (check one): DBN: 28Q161 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We have targeted newcomers (ELLs with less than two years of service) in grades 3, 4, and 5 for the Title III program, based on analysis of NYSESLAT data. Several mainstream teachers have come to us with concerns regarding the newcomers in their classrooms, reaffirming our desire to further support this group of students. In particular, we have had a larger-than-normal number of newcomers enroll at the school in the later grades. This often makes for a more difficult transition to a new language because of the growing awareness of students' self-consciousness within their social groups. The proposed program will incorporate arts, literacy, and social studies in an after school setting for newcomer ELLs. The ENL teacher will collaborate with in-house teachers with strong music backgrounds to develop and implement a program that enhances students' language development through music. In the program, students will be introduced to several instruments (primarily the guitar). Students will learn how to play the guitar, the recorder, and percussion instruments. Students will understand the structure of the guitar, learn the fingerings of chords, and perform pieces together. Students will learn the vocabulary and language structures necessary to have critical discussions related to music as an art form. Students will also learn the basics of reading music, including rhythm and notes, as well as writing basic songs themselves (both rhythm and lyrics). At the end of the program, students will perform for parents during a music celebration. The school chose music as the primary medium for the after school program for several reasons. First, music is highly engaging and of interest to most students. Second, music provides students with opportunities for interaction and collaboration. Collaborating through engaging music projects can lower students' affective filters and promote verbal skills, both of which are critical for newcomer students. Additionally, research has shown that music is an effective medium for promoting literacy development in ELLs (Paquette & Rieg, 2008; Peregoy, & Boyle, 2005). All current ELLs in grades 3 through 5 with two or fewer years of service will be invited to participate in the program. After all interested newcomers have claimed a spot in the program, we will open the program to current ELLs and select former ELLs (F-ELLs). The program will be implemented after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:25pm to 4:25pm. We will hire a supervisor to oversee the program. The program will begin November 7th and end on April 18th. The language of instruction will be English, and the program will be taught by two certified ENL teachers and two music teachers. Two teachers will teach on Wednesday and Thursday (one music teacher and one ESL teacher each day) in the co-teaching 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information model. The music teachers will provide direct music instruction, and the ENL teachers will facilitate instruction by identifying and planning for language objectives, providing comprehensible input, and providing language-specific instruction that will allow students to communicate during music instruction and collaboration with their peers. The program will include a hands-on component in which students will receive instruction and play the guitar and other instruments. Teachers will provide instruction to the whole class, then break into smaller groups for specific needs-based instruction. The ENL teacher will rotate between groups. On both Wednesday and Thursday, there will be one class. On both days, there will be two certified teachers to fifteen students. All records will be maintained in a Title III binder. This binder will include: attendance records, invitation letters in parents' preferred languages, a curriculum calendar, and observational data. All instruction will be in English. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The ENL teachers in the after school program will meet with the music teachers prior to the start of the program to discuss and plan the curriculum calendar and program implementation. This planning session will occur on November 14, 2018 from 2:30 - 3:30. In addition, throughout the year, the ENL teachers will attend regular offerings from the Queens South Field Support Center (QSFSC). These sessions will be presented by members of the Queens South Field Support Center. The dates are to be determined. Finally, the ENL teachers will provide three PD sessions for the music teachers from 7am - 8am on December 5th, January 9th, and February 6th. These PDs will focus on supporting newcomer students (comprehensible input, Second Language Acquisition theory), developing language objectives, using the Common Core language standards, developing and engaging with word walls, and promoting academic conversation. We chose these topics specifically because they are relevant to the group of newcomers that we will be teaching through the program. Through these workshops, teachers will be able to provide different points of entry into their lessons and expect adequate production from students according to their abilities. This in turn will ensure that students make adequate progress over time. All agendas and attendance sheets will be kept in an ELL PD Binder in the ELL Coordinator's room. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Prior to the start of the after school program, parents of students in the programs will be invited to a workshop. At this workshop, parents will be introduced to the curriculum and rationale of the program as a means of supporting language development. Parents will also be exposed to practices and behaviors they can try at home that can encourage linguistic and academic development. We chose these topics for the workshop because, over the years, several parents of newcomers have asked for help supporting their child as they acquire a new language. For example, speaking parents' strongest language, securing a quiet place for homework, and asking different types of questions will be strategies parents will be exposed to and encouraged to use. Invitation letters to this workshop will be translated into parents' preferred languages using in-house interpreters, where possible, and the Big Word translation services. Interpreters will be available during the workshop. We will use in-house interpreters for these workshops. The workshop for after school parents will be held after school on Thursday, November 29th from 2:30 to 3:30. The two certified ENL teachers, Reginald Pierre-Louis and Jane Ragno, will present at the workshop. Parents of after school students will be also invited to a performance by students (April 18th). The performance will be one hour. Interpreters will be available at these performances. Finally, parents with a music background will have an open invitation to share their music experience with students at any time during the program. For those parents who play an instrument, they can present their instrument and answer students' questions about the instrument. All parent letters and invitations (in all languages), agendas to workshops, and attendance sheets will be kept in a Title III Parent Binder. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. 1 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Arthur Ashe School Borough Queens School Number 161 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jill Hoder Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Reginald Pierre-Louis, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Jane Ragno, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Patricia Hanley Coach School Counselor Parent Jyoti Kaur Parent Coordinator Kathy Knowles Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Sara Goldberg, AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 680 3 Total number of ELLs 96 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.12%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses Teacher’s College Reader’s and Writer’s Project (Running Records) as its literacy assessment tool for all grades. An analysis of assessment data of kindergarten through grade 2 from the spring of 2018 shows that our ELLs begin below grade level, but more than half are reading at or above grade level by the end of second grade (excluding newcomers who have been in the U.S. for under a year). Teachers use conference notes and on-demand writing at the beginning and at the end of each writing unit to inform instruction.The school uses GoMath unit tests and teacher-made checklist that inform small group work during Math instruction. For content areas, teacher-made formative assessments include checklists, exit slips, and performance assessments. Teachers use the data from these assessments to inform small-group instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 4 The school receives support from TCRWP coaches to plan each unit prior to implementation and to observe and practice literacy strategies. The grade level teachers and ENL teachers receive support from the TCRWP coaches in-house. Classroom teachers also plan instruction collectively during grade level meetings. Teachers perform running records and take conference notes on individual students as the class works on individual or group literacy tasks (ie, writing pieces, independent or partner reading). Data from Running Records and GoMath unit assessments are uploaded onto shared Googledocs and are subsequently analyzed by teacher groups during Data Discussion on Tuesday afternoons. Teacher groups use this time to discuss intervention possibilities and small-group instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At the start of the school year, the ENL teachers use students’ NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, ELA, and content area test scores, as baseline assessments. The ENL teachers further analyze NYSESLAT scores using the ELL Data Analysis Tool. Additional consideration is given to factors such as years of service, attendance, home support, and special needs. The ENL teachers then create goals based on this analysis. As test scores become available during the school year (i.e., the ELL Baseline Assessment, the ELL Periodic Assessment), the ENL teachers reflect on and modify their goals and instruction accordingly. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teachers create goals based on the summative data. Then, during the initial planning conferences at the start of the year, they share these goals with their supervisors. The ENL teachers then identify appropriate interventions for groups of students with common needs.In addition to classroom-based interventions (small-group work), the school also has certain programs in place, such at-risk SETTS, RtI, and an after school AIS program to support specific students. Furthermore, the school also uses technology-based programs, like Achieve 3000 to support student reading and writing in and outside of school. These programs offer differentiated texts to target specific reading skills through rigorous content. Additionally, D75 teachers provide support for some students through small-group instruction.The school also modifies the Title III program to meet the needs of students using NYSESLAT scores as a data source. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students at PS 161 Q are selected for RtI based on a Universal Screener. The Universal Screener we use is Teacher’s College running records. If a child is approaching grade level, he/she is labeled as Tier 1 RtI. If a child is below grade level, the child is placed in a Tier 2 RtI group taught by a Special Education teacher to work on an intensive research-based reading intervention program. For math, the process is the same, but the universal screener is the end-of-year Go Math assessment from the child’s previous grade.The RtI teacher consults with the ENL teachers prior to placing ELL students in RtI, as it must be determined that the child’s deficiencies are related to cognition, not language.Data is maintained daily and throughout the RtI process, using teacher observation/notes and program-related assessments. The RtI teacher uses data through these sources to make instructional decisions for ELLs and non-ELLs in the program. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The school evaluates its ENL program based on NYSESLAT results, combined with reading and writing growth. The NYSESLAT data show that students are progressing as they move up the grades. This is evident in the fact that there are fewer students at the entering and emerging levels as the grades progress. The data also show that most of the ELLs at PS 161 are at the Expanding performance level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL teachers give a list to each classroom teacher of the ELLs in their class, as well as their performance levels on the most recent NYSESLAT or NYSITELL. The ENL teachers meet with each classroom teacher during scheduled Data Discussions on Tuesday afternoons to share NYSESLAT data and discuss student progress in order to inform program adjustment. 5  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The school has a standalone ENL program. ELLs are dispersed evenly (for the most part) across each grade, and ELLs who are in ICT as per their IEP recommendations are in the ICT classes. ELLs of all performance levels are grouped heterogeneously amongst their English-proficient peers. All ELLs are provided ENL services by a dually licensed (ESL and Common Branch) teacher. In general, ELLs are grouped by performance level within the grade during their ENL periods. One ENL teacher provides service to ELLs in Kindergarten, Grade 1, Grade 2, Grade 4, and Grade 5; the other ENL teacher provides service to ELLs in Grades 2 through 5. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? To determine the number of minutes of service each student is mandated to receive, the ENL teachers, at the start of the school year, analyze the previous year’s NYSESLAT scores and chart students according to grade and performance level. Newly admitted students are administered the NYSITELL, and their grade and performance levels are included in the chart, as well. The ENL teachers then determine which students scored at the Entering, Emerging, or Transitioning levels and, therefore, require 2 units (360 minutes) of English language instruction per week, those who scored at the Expanding level, requiring 1 unit (180 minutes), and those who scored at the Commanding level, requiring .5 unit (90 minutes) of English instruction per week. The ENL teachers then create schedules based on these data. The ENL teachers, who are dually certified, deliver the required units of study in ENL, integrated ENL/ELA, or integrated ENL/content area according to students' performance levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers provide content area support through the use of the school-based content area curricula, the literacy program (TCRWP), as well as the NYS content standards. The school’s content area teachers provide the ENL teachers with a content calendar, which allows the ENL teachers to plan a content-based ENL curriculum for ELLs in the standalone program. Native language support is provided through bilingual dictionaries, same-language peers, and, in some cases, school staff. Text support is provided in part by National Geographic’s leveled nonfiction texts. Content is made comprehensible through the use of the SIOP model, CALLA, and technology such as SmartBoard and internet tools. These methods are ideal for teaching all content areas and incorporate the CCLS as targets for instruction. The ENL teachers regularly provide explicit instruction of language functions and structures that are taken directly from the content curriculum. They then follow this explicit instruction with contextualized modeling of the structures. In order to make content comprehensible, the ENL teachers scaffold lessons with pictures and slide shows, videos, realia, graphic organizers, adaptation of text, TPR, and native language support (cognates, dual language dictionaries, translation through other students or staff, where possible). 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 6  ELLs in Grades 2 through 5 at PS 161, who speak Punjabi, Hindi, and Urdu, are informally assessed in reading by a bilingual paraprofessional when they are first admitted; however, they are not evaluated in their home languages throughout the year. Spanish-speaking students are evaluated in Spanish throughout the year using Achieve3000, as long as they use the program in Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students in ELL subgroups receive a variety of support throughout the school. Students who receive mandated services receive age and grade level appropriate services and resources. a. There are currently no ELLs at our school who are identified as SIFE. If there were, these students’ literacy and language progress is closely monitored by both the ESL, SETSS, and classroom teachers. b. Newcomers are supported through highly-interactive lessons that include, for example, TPR, role-play, singing, varied grouping, and interactive reading and writing. One-on-one instruction is provided during class time when students are engaged in student-centered tasks. c. For developing ELLs, instruction is heavily content-based and is supported by various scaffolds. For example, graphic organizers, provision of background information, maps, and explicit language instruction focusing on academic language are used to support student learning. For those students who are taking the NYS ELA exam for the first time, the ENL teachers and classroom teachers provide ample practice of test-taking strategies to prepare these ELLs, and others, for taking the exam.d. Instruction for Long Term ELLs is also highly content-based. In general, these students’ greatest area of need is in writing. To confront this challenge, students are supported through continuous and consistent emphasis on schema building, vocabulary development (including academic vocabulary), sentence structure, and planning for literacy tasks (ie, pre-reading and pre-writing strategies). e. Students who have attained proficiency on the NYSESLAT within the last two years are supported through the newly required 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL. Instruction for these students is content-based and focuses on specific language structures. In addition, these students receive the same testing modifications as do current ELLs on New York State standardized assessments, for up to two years after achieving proficiency on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? As per their IEPs, ELLs with special needs are either placed in a grade-level Integrated Co-Teaching class, or they receive support through a number of service providers (speech, OT/PT, SETSS, guidance). The teachers that provide services to these students take into account the annual goals and functional needs of the students when planning instruction. The ENL teachers meet with other service providers at the start of the school year to discuss shared students and ensure that there are no scheduling conflicts. In this way, ELLs-SWDs receive their mandated related services and ENL units. The SETSS teacher meets with the ENL teachers regularly to assess students’ progress, evaluate their own teaching, and plan for instruction accordingly. ELLs with special needs receive instruction through the same content area programs as their general education peers (ie, Teachers College Workshop for literacy; GoMath; etc). However, the ENL teachers and special education teachers provide instruction within these programs through different approaches (ie, grouping, modality), and using additional materials (ie, tangibles, pictures, supplemental texts). These strategies and materials help to accelerate English language development by helping ELLs with disabilities access the content, which subsequently allows them to comprehend and participate. Home language resources are provided by way of bilingual dictionaries, dual language books, same-language peers, and school staff. All ELLs have access to MyOn, a personalized digital literacy program. In the classroom, teachers incorporate online resources such as videos (watchknowlearn.org); online activities (interactivesites.weebly.com); headphones; and voice recorders. Finally, all ELLs in grades 2 through 5 receive support from Achieve 3000, a non-fiction reading program that adapts news articles to students' reading levels. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 7  At the start of the school year, the ENL teachers meet with all other service provides to discuss their shared students and to create their schedules, ensuring all students receive their mandated services. The ENL teachers and other service providers design and implement the scaffolds and supports students need in order to learn. The ENL teachers meet regularly with the SETSS and RtI teachers to discuss their shared students. PS 161 Q is, by design, an inclusive and barrier-free school. As such, we have ICT classes on each grade and the infrastructure to assist students with physical disabilities. The school also houses a District 75 program in which students are integrated into the general education classroom. The inclusive nature of the school allows ELL-SWDs to learn alongside their general education peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention programs at PS 161 include RtI and at-risk SETSS. ELLs at PS 161 receive these services based on their needs, which are assessed through their scores on the NYS ELA and Math tests. Because these intervention programs are provided to the entire student population, based on need, they are not limited to any subgroup of ENL student, nor are subgroups of ELLs inherently eligible to receive these services. The school offers an after school AIS program that focuses on literacy and math in grades 3 through 5, in preparation for the state exams. Home language support is provided through bilingual dictionaries, same-language peers, and school staff. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school does not plan to add any programs for the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The school has never opened a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. PS 161 offers several extracurricular programs to all of its students, including ELLs. These programs include after school programs in test preparation, a chess club, competitive basketball and volleyball teams, and our Making Books Sing program. ELLs have participated in all of these programs. ELLs have also been members of PS 161’s student council and the safety patrol. Participation in these programs is based on the interest and desire of the students. The school also offers a Title III-funded After School program in music for ELLs in Grades 3 through 5 and an Immigrant Saturday Academy for newcomer immigrant students, including some ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The school has a variety of content and language materials, including technology, to support ELLs. Texts include National Geographic’s nonfiction library, big books (fiction and nonfiction), leveled and themed readers, dual language books, and English and dual-language dictionaries. The ENL teachers use the content and language based program, "Avenues" by Hampton-Brown. Technology includes SmartBoards, iPads, Achieve 3000, MyOn, streaming video, and digital voice recorders. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? PS 161 does not assess home language support for our most prominent LOTE (Punjabi); however, we use Achieve 3000 to assess the reading levels of our Spanish-speaking students throughout the school year.Native language support is provided through access to dual language dictionaries in English and in the students' native languages. Students also have access to native language literature in the ENL classrooms and in the school library. These native language collections contain books in most languages currently spoken, and especially in the most common languages (Punjabi, Spanish, Hindi). Within the ENL classrooms, students provide each other with native language support, especially for newcomers. In the general education classroom, newcomers are paired with a 'buddy' who speaks his/her native language. We also have four bilingual paraprofessionals who work with their mandated students with IEPs. When possible, these paras also work with other same-language students when they are in the same classroom. 8  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teachers and other service providers work in congruence with classroom teachers. Therefore, the content they teach is based on the classroom curricula being taught in each grade. Service providers design and implement the scaffolds necessary to ensure students’ access to the content, or they provide the necessary enhancements to expand students’ understanding of the content. The ENL teachers and related service providers take ELL-SWDs' cognitive development into consideration when developing their lessons. The curricula for each classroom correspond to the CCLS at the respective grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The school does not share a building with other schools. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school currently does not have any programs for newly-enrolled ELLs prior to the start of the school year. ELLs who are admitted during the school year are encouraged to participate in the Title III after school program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The school currently does not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The school continues to enhance the skills of all teachers and school staff (including paraprofessionals, the guidance counselor, special education teachers, RtI teacher, SETSS teacher, OT, PT, Speech/Language teachers, secretaries, and parent coordinator) of ELLs through workshops. Professional development for the staff is continuous throughout the school year. Professional development is and will be provided by members of the professional development team (literacy coaches, content area teachers, service providers, and ENL teachers). This professional development is provided during the school’s designated common professional development period for teachers on each grade, and/or on days when students are not present. Among other topics, professional development focuses on the following areas: Integrating Language & ContentIdentifying Language ObjectivesAcademic Language (vocabulary, sentence structure)Comprehensible Input Understanding the NYS Performance Levels Assessment of ELLsScaffolding for ELLsStrategies for ELLs at Different Performance LevelsCommunicating with ELL Parents Paste response to question here: The ENL teachers regularly attend professional development opportunities offered by the Queens South Field Support Center. During the 2017 - 2018 school year, the ENL teachers attended the Support Center's ELL Instructional Leadership Institute for the second year. 9  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers will receive their required 15% of total PD hours in ELL training through the professional development workshops discussed in question 1. The ENL teachers take attendance at these workshops using a sign-in sheet and track teachers' hours in a spreadsheet. In addition, the ENL teachers maintain a binder that contains these sign-in sheets, along with agendas and handouts for each PD. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teachers meet with parents of ELLs beginning in mid-October to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Notices, along with translated versions (where possible), are sent home to inform parents of the meetings and the availability of interpreters. Parents are also notified by phone (with interpretation, as necessary) of these meetings. Most individual parent meetings take place on Tuesday afternoons during the school-wide parent contact time. If parents are unable to attend at this time, the ENL teachers arrange a different time that works for the parent or converse over the phone. The ENL teachers developed an information sheet that they use to share with parents their child's progress and language needs, as well as the goals of the programs and demands of the grade. The ENL teachers accompany the information sheet with examples of grade-appropriate texts and writing tasks. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 161 welcomes and encourages parental involvement in several ways. The Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meets regularly once per month, as does the School Leadership Team, which also includes parents. Additionally, in the past few years, the school has increased its number of special events per year. These are open to all parents and families, and include an Author/Illustrator night, Family Movie Nights, Spring Fling, and Family Fun Day. The parent coordinator creates a calendar of parent activities that is sent home monthly. On days when there is no parent activity planned, the parent coordinator’s room remains open to parents for inquiries and concerns, as well as for access to the Internet, among other things. Parents of the Title III programs are invited to participate during certain parts of the program, particularly during the end-of-program share. This year, the school improved its parents' needs survey, and we had the survey translated into the most commonly-spoken languages in the school. We will send out the survey at the start of each school year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0  1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jill Hoder, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Arthur Ashe School DBN: 28Q161 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jill Hoder Title Principal Patricia Hanley Assistant Principal Kathy Knowles Parent Coordinator Reginald Pierre-Louis, ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jyoti Kaur Parent Jane Ragno, ENL Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Sara Goldberg N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Assistant Principal Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 01/01/01 01/01/01 01/01/01 01/01/01 01/01/01 01/01/01 06/26/18 01/01/01 01/01/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q161 School Name: Arthur Ashe Superintendent: Mabel Sarduy The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jane Ragno ENL Teacher Yes (10/25/2016) Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The school looks at the Home Language Identification Survey to determine the language spoken by parents. The school also assesses parents' interpretation needs when they interact with school staff. The school then arranges for access to interpreters for school events (i.e., Parent Teacher Conferences, meetings with teacher, etc.), as well as the translation of documents to be sent home to parents. The ENL teachers use a combination of HLIS, blue cards, and ATS reports (RAPL) to gather and organize information on parents' preferred languages. The ENL teachers use this information to create class lists for classroom teachers to inform them of their students' parents' preferred languages, both oral and written. 4  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Punjabi Spanish Hindi Bengali 72 40 12 5 10.4 5.78 1.73 .72 81 43 13 7 11.71 6.21 1.88 1.01 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Punjabi Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Achieve NYC (including the Parent Bill of Rights) and Parent Handbook Start of the school year NYS testing Flyers Two weeks prior to testing Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The Parent Bill of Rights comes to us translated from the City in Bengali, Spanish, and Urdu. The Parent Handbook is we already had translated into Punjabi. All flyers are translated prior to dissemination to families. After School Information Parent Teacher Conference announcements Two weeks prior to the start of the program All flyers are translated prior to dissemination to families. One week prior to the conference All flyers are translated prior to dissemination to families. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 5  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Four parent-teacher conferences September, November,March, and May Incoming Kindergarten/New Admit Orientation Individual meetings with ELL parents ELL Parent Orientation Throughout the year Tuesday Afternoon Parent correspondence Tuesdays interpretation service(s)? The school uses a combination of in-house interpreters and over-the-phone interpretation services throughout the year. For parent teacher meetings, the school hires interpreters (either in-house paraprofessionals or contracted interpreters through the Big Word). The school uses in-house staff as interpreters. At the moment, the school has four staff members who speak Punjabi/Hindi/Urdu, and four staff members who speak Spanish. In the event that we do not have member of the school staff who speaks a parent's preferred language, we use over-the-phone interpretation services. The school uses in-house staff as interpreters. At the moment, the school has four staff members who speak Punjabi/Hindi/Urdu, and four staff members who speak Spanish. In the event that we do not have member of the school staff who speaks a parent's preferred language, we use over-the-phone interpretation services. The school uses in-house staff as interpreters. At the moment, the school has four staff members who speak Punjabi/Hindi/Urdu, and four staff members who speak Spanish. In the event that we do not have member of the school staff who speaks a parent's preferred language, we use over-the-phone interpretation services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school-wide emergency, a message is sent home using the Robo-call service, and Spanish-speaking parents have the option of hearing the message in Spanish. At the current time, the service does not offer Punjabi as a language option. For individual student emergencies, the school uses in-house interpreters or the contracted over-the-phone interpretation services to contact parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure6  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the start of the school year, the ENL teachers give each classroom teacher a list of students in their class along with the students' parents' preferred languages. The ENL teachers also provide staff members with a training or refresher on how to use the over-the-phone interpretation services at the start of the school year. During these trainings, the LAC discusses tips for working with an interpreter using a hand-out as a guide. Teachers are given the T&I Unit contact information, as well as the Language ID Guide and Language Palm Card. As a reminder, prior to the parent teacher conferences in November, March, and May, the LAC puts a hand-out in all teachers mailboxes with the contact information for the over-the-phone interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school has had the Parent Handbook translated into Spanish, Bengali, Urdu, and Punjabi. The translated welcome poster is affixed to the inside front door of the school. A copy of the Language ID Guide is at the security desk and the main office. The Parents' Guide to Language Access was copied and sent home to all parents at the start of the school year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The ENL teachers have developed a survey for parents that addresses their language needs at the school. The survey has been translated into parents' preferred languages (Punjabi, Hindi, Spanish, Urdu, Bengali). The survey will go out to parents at the start of the school year. 7 
