 28Q167 School Name: METROPOLITAN EXPEDITIONARY LEARNING SCHOOL Principal: DAMON MCCORD   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Metropolitan Expeditionary Learning School 342800011167 6-12 School Number (DBN): 28Q167 91-30 Metropolitan Ave. Forest Hills, NY 11375 718-286-3500 Phone Number: 718-286-3501 Fax: Damon McCord Dmccord2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: Affinity Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Patrick Finley Adam King Bethany Thomas Shoshanna Malett YanaShah JemmaThomas none District Information KathyPelles Superintendent: 335 Adams St Rm 506 Brooklyn, NY 11212 krehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-557-2618 Phone Number: 718-557-2623 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: n/a Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Patrick Finley Adam King Bethany Thomas N/A N/A YanaShah JemmaThomas N/A Damon McCord JasminIlkay YifatTam-Rich *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Co-Principal / School Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Shoshanna Malett Shavvone Jackson Diana Rivello Rachel Demalderis Candice Abreu Erin Hickey Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Teacher/ School Teacher/ School Teacher/ School Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? OUR MISSION Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission is to teach students to think critically in ways that prepare them best for college; provide a strong background in science, technology, and sustainability; and build leadership capacity in order to create change. Our graduates will be prepared for success in college through demanding coursework and fieldwork experiences with leaders in the sustainability movement. Graduates will have an understanding of the challenges faced by their   generation and how to generate innovative solutions in the fields of architecture, science, urban planning, and technology. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. CORE VALUES The Metropolitan Expeditionary Learning School has five core values that inspire everything we do. They are: ● Advocacy: Students will learn to be informed decision-makers who advocate for themselves and others as they examine the challenges that face our world and share possible solutions. ● Intellect and Curiosity: Our school will build a culture of learning that is evident in the classrooms and in activities created for all students. ● Respect: A culture of mutual respect will be nurtured and embodied by the entire school community. ● Stewardship: There is a responsibility shared by all those whose actions affect our world. ● Success and Failure: Students need to feel successful to build the capacity and confidence to take risks and respond to challenges. Students will also learn from their failures by persevering through tough times and turning challenges into opportunities for creativity and growth. To understand our school’s context, it is imperative that one be familiar with the strategic partnerships we have with EL Education (EL) and NYC Outward Bound Schools. It defines the kind of school we have and our beliefs about how students learn best. Our school utilizes the EL Education school model, which is rooted in the principles and practices of Outward Bound, and supports the development of student character and good citizenship while also fostering a culture of achievement. This is evidenced by EL schools consistently outperforming district and state averages. While each school is unique, all share common features including active, real-world learning that is often community- or service-based; a rigorous and interdisciplinary academic curriculum; longer class periods; membership in an advisory program called crew; and team-building adventures outside the classroom. All incoming students enjoy a three- to five-day backpacking orientation aimed at fostering group cohesion, communication skills, perseverance and the setting and meeting of goals. Another hallmark of EL schools is the breadth and quality of the professional development and other supports we provide to teachers. Unlike teachers at most public schools, ours are continually supported through Expeditionary Learning’s renowned professional development program, which brings regional and national opportunities to every teacher in our school as well as continual, on-site support. You can read more about Expeditionary Learning Schools at www.elschools.org and more about NYC Outward Bound Schools at http://www.nycoutwardbound.org/ . The principles we use to guide our work are called the Core Practice Benchmarks. You can access the Core Practice Benchmarks at http://elschools.org/sites/default/files/Core%20Practice%20Final_EL_120811.pdf Aside from Expeditionary Learning and NYC Outward Bound, we feel another important piece of context at our school is our diversity. We are an extremely diverse school which, from year one, has been committed to serving all students in District 28. We have approximately twenty-five feeder elementary schools and as a result, enjoy a broad range of diversity across many indicators – ethnic background, socioeconomic status, performance levels on state exams, and special education students. We view this as a strength of our school and we work hard to ensure we maintain our 0  diversity, believing that the real-world experiences we give our students are not just to build skills around academic content, but to also build the skills needed to navigate a rapidly changing world. MELS Highlights and Unique Features Selected as a Showcase School for 2018-19 School year Selected as an EL Education Mentor school (since 2016)    100% graduation rate and 98% college acceptance rate for our inaugural class of graduates (97% in the two years since then) Featured in "Learning that Lasts" by Ron Berger and "The Problem Solvers" by Charlie Leadbeater  Instructional Awards/Recognition  11 Fund for Teachers Award Winners (Ms. Sewall, Ms. Scher, Ms. Glantz, Ms. Edwards, Mr. Shieh, Mr. King, Ms. Moss, Ms. Shiney, Mr. Hanlon, Ms. Dunbar, Mr. Fitzgibbon)  2015 NYCOBS Gaynor McCown Excellence in Teaching Award (Mr. O’Connell)  2014 NYCOBS Gaynor McCown Excellence in Teaching Award (Ms. Scher)  2014 - 2020 Credentialed EL School (one of only 9 across the country)  2014-2015 Learning Partners Program: Host School of Model Practice  2014 & 2018 EL National Site Seminar Host School  Over 10 EL National Conference Master Class Presenters on Staff  2013-2015 Publication of 8th Grade Students’ “Queens Migration Stories” Partnerships  Brooklyn Boatworks  Cooper Union   NYCOBS  Trust for Public Land LEAF: with the Nature Conservancy Individual Student Award LEAF Summer Program Scholarships: 13 students   Outward Bound Summer Program Scholarship: 1 student  National Outdoor Leadership Summer Program Scholarship: 3 students  Sam Schwartz Engineering Internship: 2 students Student Opportunities  Germany/Austria/Switzerland Study Abroad Trip: 2018  Costa Rica Study Abroad Trip: 2018 Data Points  94% Student Attendance  2011-2018 Over 90% Staff Retention   Over 90% Participation in Student Led Conferences  ELA, Living Environment, Global, and US History regents over 80% pass rate Learning Environment Survey above City Average 1  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. IEP students - continued emphasis and support on executive function skills - organizing, studying, etc. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. FRAMEWORK FOCUS AREA FOR 2017-18: COLLABORATIVE TEACHERS / RIGOROUS INSTRUCTION Every year, we create a Work Plan with EL Education. This plan guides the focus of our schoolwide work and helps us articulate a vision for the scope of the work at our school. In order for this work to remain coherent and focused, our instructional leadership team determines how each of the collaborative work structures at our school will contribute to the goal. This year, our school goal is to establish cycles of teacher inquiry/action research across all of the collaborative teacher groups in the school. These inquiry cycles will be centered on the development of critical thinking skills for students We feel this goal, while broad in scope, will contribute to the level of rigorous instruction at our school. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q167 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 841 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 45 46 16 18 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 71 45 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 60.3% % Reduced Lunch 1.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.0% 39.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.25 3% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 45.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 96% 94% 97.0% 35.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YSH N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 89 88 1 94.2% 11.2% 19.0% 17.1% 19.6% 6.9% 2 30% 4.9 36.6% 31% 98% 93% N/A N/A N/A No No NO YES N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On the Instructional Core areas on our most recent Quality Review, we received scores of well-developed and proficient. For our first graduating classes, 97% of them graduated on time and 97% of them were accepted into college. For an unscreened school with over 20% of our population having IEPs, that is a point of pride. For needs, we want to continue to push the rigor and engagement at all levels across our classrooms. This year, we want to focus on leveraging teacher inquiry to create stronger classroom practices around critical thinking skills, leading to higher quality student work. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have maintained and deepened cycles of inquiry focused on aspects of critical thinking in our grade teams and departmental teams, resulting in a 3% increase in the "Questioning and Discussion" component on Advance. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increase the number of teachers who participate in inquiry cycles All teachers 2018-19 school year Teachers and Co-Principals Collect artifacts from meetings to help with review of effectiveness all teachers on going ILT Support team facilitators in their facilitation and professional learning through facilitator workshops led by leadership teacher leaders ongoing Co-Principals, Assistant Principal, Instructional Guide, School Designer Conduct instructional walkthroughs to collect data on critical thinking in the classroom. teachers 2018-19 school year ILT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will be the liaison between parents and the school, relaying important information home through an email communication system. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Co-Principals, teachers, afterschool per-session, admin staff, Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January, during our Mid-year huddle, we will examine our Advance ratings to determine if we are on track. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We have a strong school culture, with very high attendance and positive responses on the Learning Environment Survey. We have had over 90% teacher retention since we first opened in 2010. However,three years ago we experienced a great deal of inconsistency with our Parent Coordinator position, having three different people serve in the role over the course of the year. As a result, the percentage of students, parents, and teachers completing the learning environment survey dropped in the student category. Even though our completion percentage increased in some areas, an area of need is to focus on continuing to increase those survey response rates so that we have a body of data to examine that is reflective of the diverse perspectives of our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school community will increase the response rate on the learning environment survey by at least 3% for parents and students. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Our parent coordinator will track response rates of students and follow up with students who have not taken the survey. Students with IEPs, ENL students, and other students with reading difficulties will be given support by their teachers while taking the survey in Crew. Students, Crew Advisors April 2019 Parent Coordinator, Crew Advisors The Co-Principals will dedicate time for teachers to take the survey and will follow up with any teachers who have not completed the survey. Our parent coordinator will provide frequent reminders for parents to complete their surveys, track response rates of parents, and follow up with parents who have not taken the survey. Teachers April 2019 Co-Principals Parents April 2019 Parent Coordinator and Co-Principals Monthly PC meetings offered by the superintendent's office PC Ongoing monthly Parent Coordinator and Co-Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will be the liaison between parents and the school, relaying important information home through an email communication system. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff PD time, Crew time, School messenger system, Mail chimp system Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 8  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. There will be frequent and ongoing monitoring during the survey administration period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey completion rate emails. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have an intensely collaborative staff that works hard to develop engaging, rigorous, authentic curricula. In order to better support teachers in that work, we need to implement structures and supports that will help remove cumbersome tasks from their duties, provide more opportunities for professional learning, and create additional opportunities to showcase and share their work for feedback. For our veteran teachers, we wanted to create a structure that tended to their professional learning – something that is often pushed aside for teachers who are experienced and have shown effective classroom practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of MELS teachers will have participated in at least two cycles of inquiry related to the topic of critical thinking strategies that result in high quality student work, resulting in a 3% increase in the "Designing Coherent Instruction" component on Advance. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Establish and implement Inquiry cycles in teacher collaborative teams that will meet on Wednesdays throughout the year All teachers 2018-19 school year PD Committee, Instructional Leadership team (ILT), Instructional Guide 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will be the liaison between parents and the school, relaying important information home through an email communication system. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule flexibility, school designer time (the School Designer is a person who works with EL Education to support implementation of the EL Education Core Practices), PD time, Instructional Guide Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will have a ‘Mid-Year Huddle’ to examine our progress toward this goal and make adjustments. 1  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid Year Huddle documents Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The “Co-Director” or “Co-Principal” model for schools has been utilized in this country for years and a growing body of research has begun highlighting its effectiveness. Locally, at New York City’s iSchool, the Co-Principal model was touted as a strength of the school and contributed to its success. When one of the two founding Principals eventually transitioned to another position, the leadership model ensured that the original vision and momentum was maintained. Similarly, we believe that the greatest strength of the Metropolitan Expeditionary Learning School is our co-directorship. This model of shared leadership has been a part of the vision for this school since its inception and has been vital to the continued success of the school. Our co-leadership has led to a firm foundation for our program and has served to develop a collaborative school community unlike any other. Most importantly, we believe that this model promises sustainability for our school for years to come. This shared vision ensures that there will never be a void of leadership in our school community. In the small school movement, there is an expectation that teachers will need to wear many hats. Additionally, teachers may be asked to develop quickly as leaders in chairing departments, committees, and grade teams. At our school, we have not just spoken to the idea of shared leadership – we have modeled the practice. For this reason, we have already groomed many teachers to become teacher leaders. We have worked with them, but again, most importantly, we have modeled the practice of shared decision-making. Gronn and Hamilton (2004) suggest that a “co-principalship is an important attempt to institutionalize a culture and a practice of distributed leadership” (Eckman). This is not a practice only being examined in the world of education. As Heenan and Bennis (1999) argue, “Co-leadership is not a fuzzy-minded buzzword designed to make non-CEOs feel better about themselves and their workplaces . . . In this new organizational galaxy, power doesn’t reside in a single person. Rather power and responsibility are dispersed . . .” Likewise, O’Toole, Galbraith, and Lawler note that the trend in the business world during the past fifty years has been to “expand the capacity for leadership at the top of business organizations” (Eckman). Unfortunately, despite virtually everyone at the DOE acknowledging the success of our model, from the Learning Partners Program to Chancellor Fariña, the DOE has still not formally recognized our model by naming both Patrick Finley and Damon McCord as Principals. This model has worked well for our school, is another innovative practice for our school to showcase, and is an integral part to the success of our school. Therefore, the need of the school as it relates to the Framework is to formally establish and support this innovative leadership structure that models the professional growth and collaboration we expect of our staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  By June 2019, DOE will officially recognize the MELS Co -Principalship,resulting in both Mr. Finley and Mr. McCord being named officially in MyGalaxy and other systems as Co-Principals of MELS (28Q167), in order to continue to strengthen the opportunities for Effective Leadership as measured by a 5% increase in teacher pedagogy in instruction (Domain 3). 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent advocacy campaign that involves reaching out to the media as well as elected officials. The DOE 2018-19 school year SLT, PTA Teacher advocacy campaign that involves working with parents to contact the media and elected officials. Teachers and staff at MELS 2018-19 school year UFT Chapter Co-Leader advocacy campaign that builds on the years of letters, emails, and documentation of the feasibility of the proposal. Co-Principals, once officially recognized by the DOE, will implement an inquiry cycle for the Instructional Leadership Team to engage in, in order to better support teacher teams and individuals with elements of instructional practice. Co-Principals 2018-19 Co-Principals, CSA school year 2018-19 school year Co-Principals Co-Principals, Academic Dean, Instructional Guide, IEP teacher, School Designer. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will be the liaison between parents and the school, relaying important information home through an email communication system. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. No school resources will be utilized for this. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, we will examine our progress toward meeting our goal to determine if we are on track. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Email from the Chancellor approving a Co-Principalship at MELS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As evidenced by our Learning Environment Survey results, parents are very satisfied with our school. Our enrollment data also confirms that families see MELS as a desirable school option, with over 2000 students applying for approximately 150 seats. We engage families in Student Led Conferences at MELS, with approximately 90% of families participating in the two sessions per year. However, attendance at PTA meetings, grade-based parent nights, and other events still is lagging. We would like to start focusing on providing useful workshops and meetings as another way to get families more involved in the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have improved our attendance at Curriculum night by 5%, as evidenced by attendance totals taken that night. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Re-branding Curriculum Night as "Meet the Teachers", based on parent feedback that their primary interest is meeting the teachers, with curriculum being secondary All families September 2018 Parent Coordinator and crew advisors Revising schedule for that evening to include Crew, our advisory program, as a way to further engage families All families and teachers September 2018 Co-Principals Crew Advisor phone calls to families, in addition to robocalls and mailchimp messages. All families September 2018 Co-Principals, Crew Advisors, PC Implement a better attendance capture for that night All families September 2018 Non-teaching staff, Co-Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our Parent Coordinator will be the liaison between parents and the school, relaying important information home through an email communication system. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, Co-Principals, teachers, per session, overtime for school aides and community workers, supplies for communication (mailings, postage, paper, etc.), School Messenger, Mail Chimp Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will have compiled and reviewed the attendance from Curriculum Night 8  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Scores on NYS exam and diagnostic Scores on NYS exam and diagnostic Science Teacher assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Performance Series intervention in the Silent Sustained Reading (SSR) period. Performance series program for targeted math intervention, as well as teacher work outside of class Teacher work outside of class Small group Individual and small group Individual and small group Twice per week during the school day. Before school, after school, and lunch with teachers Before school, after school, and lunch with teachers Before school, after school, and lunch with teachers Social Studies Teacher assessments Teacher work outside of class Individual and small group staff referral counseling individual and small group various At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 26 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Increased support for STH in the form of uniforms, transportation passes, additional library hours, etc. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 24 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1 Supplies, uniforms 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 13155 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) X Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We plan to recruit and hire certified teachers, who will teach in their certified content areas. Not only will we focus on their professional development here at school, we will also send teachers to high quality PD provided by EL Education and NYC Outward Bound. We retain approximately 90% of our teachers every year. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers will participate in ongoing cycles of inquiry focused on instructional strategies to build critical thinking skills aligned with the CCSS. Externally, teachers will participate in high quality PD provided by EL Education and NYC Outward Bound. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Our TA program will focus on creating high quality curricula aligned to CCSS, improving teacher practice to build critical thinking in students, and providing additional resources for students after school to support their development and engagement. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). We will continue to develop project-based, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning, with the TA program providing critical support during the regular school day, as well as afterschool. 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 4  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  5   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Metropolitan Expeditionary Learning School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Metropolitan Expeditionary Learning School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 7  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 8  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Metropolitan Expeditionary Learning School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support 9  of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 0  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary "School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 1  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Metropolitan Expeditionary Learning Scho Borough Queens School Number 167 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Damon McCord Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lauren Kosasa Teacher/Subject Area Gabriel Espinal/ Social Sts. Teacher/Subject Area Barbara Brown/ELA Related-Service Provider Antonella Truncali Superintendent Pelles Assistant Principal Pat Finley Coach School Counselor Andriena Nunez Parent Ms. Kazim Parent Coordinator Nyra Prescod Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 845 Total number of ELLs 22 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.60% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 0 3 0 4 0 2 0 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses a variety of assessments to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLS. This work begins during the summer in our "Summer Bridge" program for new students. At this program, students take part in a baseline in both math and ELA (Common Core aligned). At the beginning of school, we also provide a diagnostic (i-Ready) that provides lexiles as well as other information on reading levels. We also of course use the state tests as well as school designed assessments. The data is used to help us determine whether further supports are needed (ie: our after school Ramp Up program as well as our sustained reading pull-out support). This data helps inform our school's instructional plan for after school supports and in-school interventions. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 5  The leadership team meets weekly with the Reading Interventionalist who is in charge of ongoing literacy assessments of all students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the criteria in the following ways. First, we expect students to pass the NYSTITELL. Second, we expect our students who have needs to make at least a year of progress- but we often expect to see more than a year of growth for students that are behind. Other factors that show success are high attendance rates, credits earned, and participation in school culture/activities. All show our success as a program. The most important metric in our eyes is looking at the students who entered our school in 6 th grade and seeing their progress towards graduation. All of our ELLs and FELLs in high school are on track to graduate in four years. To ensure that students are meeting AYP, teachers set learning targets based on standards that are aligned to state tests and teachers work to ensure that students meet targets. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? When students are not meeting benchmarks in class and/or not making progress on exams, our LAP examines student programs to determine what additional supports might be offered (ie: After School, Reading intervention, etc.) 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Although we are not a K-5 school, we still use the RtI framework as a support for identifying strategies for struggling students. RTI is used as a response when students are identified and follow up meetings are held by Katie Blouse following the RTI guidelines. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Although we have a very small pool of data, one trend is clear. Our students with special needs who are also ELLs have more difficulty with the NYSESLAT. Many of our students with more than 4 years of service are students with special needs. The data from the NYSITELL includes a majority of students with IEPS that will be in need of services this year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our administration meets monthly with our ESL teachers to discuss findings and make adjustments in programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ESL teachers push-in to provide instruction in Social Studies and Science classes. We have only a few students in each grade and these two to three students are grouped together in classes. In 6 th grade, we have more ELLs and they are grouped together in two heterogenous classes. The teachers work to differentiate as students are integrated into the class in an inclusive model. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 6  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The Co-Principal meets with all ESL teachers at the beginning of the year. The list of students requiring supports is created and each student's individual need for instructional minutes is listed. The group works to co-create schedules of intergrated instruction for all students. All students who are in need of ELL support receive support from ESL teachers pushing into their content classes- the instructional minutes meet the standards set in charts 5.1 and 5.2. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ESL teachers push-in to core content classes to support students. ESL teachers also meet weekly with grade team to support teachers with differentiating content for students. ESL teachers work with a variety of resources, which sometimes include texts in students' native languages (which is most often Spanish for our ELLs). All teachers meet as a grade team to set rigorous learning targets aligned to the CCLS. At times, the materials used to help students achieve these learning targets are differentiated. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ESL teachers meet with grade teams and support teachers with differentiation strategies, including asssessing and providing materials in native language where appropriate. Co-Principals set aside resources to support teachers when additionarl resources are needed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status At our school, we have yet to have SIFE students. As a new school, we do not currently have any SIFE students. We would work with our network to support our ESL instructor if any students were sent to our school with needs beyond our current students. During the summer, we examine our rosters on ATS and plan for the needs of all students. For SIFE students or students at a "B" level that have newly arrived, we have a variety of supports (Ramp Up, SSR, Crew) that help students who need additional support. Additionally, we would have materials and the opportunity to be assessed in their native language (the parent coordinator has done much of this support in the past). For students in the country for four to six years who tend to be "I" or "A", our ESL teacher works to provide differentiated support to each student to help in their growth in all four modalities. For students that have been in the country longer than six years, we bring these students to RtI to examine whether another issue or challenge might be present. For our former ELLs that have exited ELL status, teacher teams monitor their growth and progress- as well as looking for opportunities to differentiate for students as appropriate. These students still receive entitled services from an ESL teacher as well as testing accommodations as appropriate. Our Testing Coordinator creates a modifications list that includes all students entitled to this support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? As an EL school, there are two instructional stragies that are a part of our vision and culture that are important to note here. First, we have an interdisciplinary approach to curriculum. At our school, teams of teachers meet every week to examine instructional materials and connections. For our ELLs, these meetings and the curricular connections with a common vocabulary help to reinforce content and big ideas by going in depth. Additionally, our hands-on approach to learning and collaborative work allow students the opportunity to access the material on their own and with the support of peers who speak the same language. The EL model lists a variety of approaches for supporting student instruction. Some specific 7  strategies used for differentiation include leveled texts, scaffolds such as graphic organizers, and tiered instruction. All of this work ensures access to the academic content for all students in our school. We schedule students for both their mandates on their IEP (for example: students who are ICT receive team teaching with two teacher in the classroom) while ELLS with IEPs also receive support from their ESL teacher who pushes in to those classes or works with students during their Crew and SSR. Our school schedules students for SETTS, 12:1, and ICT as mandated on their IEP. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? As a small school, the administration works directly with the ESL teacher to ensure that each of our ELLs have the program best suited to meet their needs. As a school, we have created push-in opportunities to create the least restrictive environment. For example, a student who is in a small class setting who could benefit from an ICT class will be flexibly scheduled into ELA or Math classes- as is appropriate. We have an ESL student with flexible scheduling that demonstrates this example 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. This year, we provide summer bridge to assess new students in ELA and math. We begin the year with Ramp Up after school to support the students most in need of support in ELA and math. When we get closer to the state tests and Regents, we offer Regents Prep to students. In science and social studies, we offer Regents Prep after school as a support and material is available in Spanish when needed. We also provide targeted small group instruction during SSR to low performing readers. Lastly, teachers provide intervention at lunch and before school as needed for Social and Science. All of our interventions are currently in English. Our ELLs are a targeted subgroup that we examine as a group when we look for trends in our data, within that, this year our group is slightly larger so subgroups by level as determined by the NYSESLAT will also be examined. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We considered a program for beginning level ELLs, but we did not receive any. Our population remains low (less than 3%) Currently, our focus on improving is in all areas being that we are a growing school. Every summer, teachers meet for a week (Expeditionary Planning Week) to plan curriculum for the year. Each year, we continue to look for more differentiated (including native language texts where appropriate) to use in our Expeditions. This is an area of improvement to consider for next summer's curriculum work. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our current program is meeting the needs of students. With such a small population, we do not plan to discontinue any services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our bilingual parent coordinator works to communicate opportunities to all students for our after school. For our ELLs that are mandated to attend support, Ms. Ramirez speaks directly to families to ensure participation. We offer support services as well as after school activities (ie: yoga, soccer, gardening, etc). Our parent coordinator speaks with all families in Spanish who have additional questions. Last year, 100% of our ELL population participated in an after school activity thus demonstrating our work to ensure equal access. Currently, our ELLs are enrolled in after school support (for students who scored low on last year's exams) in ELA and Math. Students are also enrolled in teams and clubs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our ESL teacher uses a variety of materials to supplement instruction (ie: Smartboard activities, iReady, texts, bilingual glossaries, buddy systems, etc) in all four core content areas. Our instructional model also encourages a variety of materials to allow students to enter the content through different modalities (ie: differentiated texts, differentiated "kick-off" materials- video, text, etc 8  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our school only offers ESL. Currently, students can share their writing in the native language when helpful and materials for classes can be provided in their native language, in most cases this is Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As a middle school/high school, we have different supports and opportunities available to both. Our after school program in the middle school is a support geared towards the skills measured on the state tests. In high school, we offer a Regents Prep course. In middle school, our ELLs participate in SSR support with the ESL teacher where our high school students are provided with more support in science class where materials can be differentiated. We look for opportunites that are developmentally appropriate to engage students in learning and modify the work to ensure that it meets students where they are. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our ESL teacher uses a variety of materials to supplement instruction (ie: Smartboard activities, iReady, texts, bilingual glossaries, buddy systems, etc) in all four core content areas. Our instructional model also encourages a variety of materials to allow students to enter the content through different modalities (ie: differentiated texts, differentiated "kick-off" materials- video, text, etc 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the summer, we run a program over two days called "Summer Bridge". During this time, we assess all students in ELA and Math. These baseline assessments help to ensure that we program students correctly and that we offer the appropriate support services. During the year, we meet individually with all students. All ELLs are given the same baselines to determine appropriate placement and supports. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish and French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All staff participate in a variety of Professional Development. This work begins in the summer. During this time, all staff is supported in Crew (Advisory) instruction. This support includes helping our staff bridge the move of ELLs from elementary to middle school. Additionally, our teaching staff works with Expeditionary Learning, a model which stressed literacty across the curriculum. Our staff, including the guidance counselor, will participate in more than 7.5 hours of training on differentiation of instruction to support ELLs. We are focusing our PD this year as a school on the Danielson Framework and supporting assessment strategies. During our 7.5 hours, we are working to provide strategies for informal assessing students needs and then using the data to differentiate for students. During our grade team times, our ESL teacher works with teachers to support 9  subgroups. Teachers examine student data to determine growth and strategize for differentiating instruction. One of our school's goals is to support staff in their work to differentiate instruction for students. Staff have the option of both in-house and out-of-house training opportunities. Practices are shared during meetings and student work is examined. This year's PD focuses on assessment. Our ESL teachers are working with her partner teachers to differentiate learning targets as appropriate. Our calendar includes every Wednesday from 2:30 until 3:20 (with two Wednesdays lasting until 4:05 each month). Additionally, we have supported our bilingual social worker with professional development to support students in the transition from middle school to high school. Our counseling team attends professional development meetings with our network (EL) of schools to learn and share best practices (for example: we have borrowed many parts of our college plan from existing EL schools). We aslo support other staff by sending them to professional development within our district and group of schools. Our staff have opportunities to visit other EL schools, meet in grade teams, and participate in inquiry groups to support their work in curriculum planning. In the past, we have also sent specific teachers to differentiation professional development. All of the work described in question 1 is directly related to supporting all teachers as they craft learning targets aligned to CCLS. As an Expeditionary Learning school, this work of aligning learning targets to standards is central to the work and all teachers engage in over fifty hours of professional development specific to this work. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As a 6-12 school, our entire staff works to support all students in their transition from middle school to high school. Our Summer Bridge program is important in supporting students' transition to middle school- and our bilingual social worker works with a group of students. Our PC and guidance department see our district and Affinity Group support as resources. All teachers meet once a week to plan horizontally for students. These grade level meetings provide a variety of supports to teachers. We keep attendance for all meetings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ESL teachers serve as advisors and communicate regularly with families. We have many staff members who can provide translation- our parent coordinator keeps a list of all staff that speak multiple languages. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. As a new school, we have yet to see a great deal of parent involvement of our ELLs- we have a very small population. Our experienced, bilingual Parent Coordinator is well aware of the need to involve all parents. She actively reaches out to our entire population and keeps services in mind for parents. This work begins at our Open Houses where our Parent Coordinator offers tours in Spanish to interested families. Parents of ELLs attend our active PTA meetings and parent workshops (ie: Impact- grading system). We send notices in native language. Our Parent Coordinator works with the Distict to coordinate opportunities for parents. This includes finding translation for events such as Curriculum Night and SLCs. Additionally, we have a team of parent volunteers that our Parent Coordinator coordinates with to provide translation as needed. We meet with the Parent Coodinator weekly to discuss outreach and evaluate needs, and we specifically talk about the needs of parents of ELLs. We look forward to planning workshops to support parents and will critically examine our parent involvement at the end of the year. These workshop and activities are based on feedback and surveys of our parent needs. Our PC continues to look for staff and families that can support in translation support for communicating with families. 0  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Damon Mccord, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Damon McCord Title Principal Pat Finley Assistant Principal Nyra Prescod Parent Coordinator Lauren Kosasa ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Katie Blouse Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/11/17 9/11/17 9/11/17 9/11/17 1/1/01 9/11/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28q167 School Name: Metropolitan Expeditionary Learning Superintendent: Ms. Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nyra Prescod Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We collect data in a variety of ways as a school to ensure that we are meeting all families needs. The most important measure is the data of participation at our Student Led Conferences. The SLC Handbook includes translated documents (132 of our families speak Spanish) for teachers to ensure that all families are reached. Last year, we had 90% attendance by all families at our November and February SLCs. Our non-English speaking families attended at the same rate as our English speaking families. Our teachers worked closely with our bilingual parent coordinator to provide translation services for families at SLCs. Our Parent Coordinator creates a list of languages spoken as well as staff members who can translate before As a school, we also send our introductory information to families, vital information on school policies, weekly updates from the Parent Coordinator, and all other important reminders in both Spanish and English- including our Emergency Contact cards. Our Parent Coordinator also goes to Open Houses for new families and coordinates student volunteers that are bilingual to ensure that families gain information to our school from the onset. For those families that do not speak Spanish, our Parent Coordinator reaches out to support those families as needed. 4  Our LES is an important measure in looking at the success of our school in communicating with families. Every year, we assess our population to look for trends in the languages spoken by our families. We look at data on ATS to examine overall numbers of families that speak a language other than English. This year, similar to last year, many languages (23 in total) with 268 families in total listing a language spoken at home other than English. Again, most of these families speak Spanish (over 70%). All of our ELLs but one speak Spanish at home. We have four administrative staff that are bilingual to support families that speak Spanish when they call with questions. We also have a bilingual Social Worker to support families. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Percent Oral Preferred ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) CHINESE ANY FRENCH FANTI (AKA FANTE) GREEK HAITIAN CREOLE HINDI JAPANESE JONKHA ENGLISH PILIPINO (A.K.A. TAGALOG) PUNJABI (A.K.A. PANJABI) POLISH PORTUGUESE ROMANIAN RUSSIAN SPANISH URDU 2 1 23 0 4 1 1 3 4 1 0 949 1 7 2 2 1 2 324 5 0.15 0.08 1.73 0 0.3 0.08 0.08 0.23 0.3 0.08 0 71.19 0.08 0.53 0.15 0.15 0.08 0.15 24.31 0.38 2 1 23 1 4 1 1 3 4 1 1 940 1 7 1 0 1 4 330 7 0.15 0.08 1.73 0.08 0.3 0.08 0.08 0.23 0.3 0.08 0.08 70.52 0.08 0.53 0.08 0 0.08 0.3 24.76 0.53 We communicate most often in Spanish and English. Our families also communicate in Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, Czech, French, Chinese, Fanti, Greek, Jonkha, French-Kymer, Haitian Creole, Hebrew, Hindi, Japanese, Mandarin, Philipino, Polish, Portuguese, Punjabi, Romanian, Russian, Serbo-Croatian, Spanish, Twi, Ukranian, and Urdo. x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. 5  There Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Sept- Introductory Materials Sept through November- Open House materials Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our parent coordinator coordinates with our team of parent volunteers. January- Report Cards June- Orientation Materials June- Report Cards x x x x x x We distribute translations of emergency cards, lunch forms, calendars, and welcome emails. Our Parent Coordinator also works to insure that other important pieces of information are communicated to families. In the fall, we conduct Open Houses in November where we insure that our Parent Coordinator is present. We hold SLCs twice a year, as well as Curriculum Night where our PC looks for translators. At Orientation in June, families receive introductory materials in Spanish. x x x 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Our school holds a Back to School night in September, Student Led Conferences twice a year, and Presentations of Learning twice a year. We have over 90% attendance at SLCs due to the work of our Sept- Back to School October- SLCs provide interpretation service(s)? Our Parent Coordinator organizes staff and parents to translate for each event. 6  advisors and Parent Coordinator. Our advisors call home to all families regularly. Our Parent Coordinator creates a list of staff members who can support in translation. February - SLCs May- POLs x x x x x x x x x 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, our team (which includes staff members who speak various languages) convene with the Co-Principals to ensure timely communication to families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our teams meet regularly in grade team to plan activities for students that are inclusive for all students. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our Parent Coordinator has meet with Administration regarding all four of these elements. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 7  Our school gathers input from parents regularly. We use the Learning Environment Survey and our own surveys to gather information from parents. Administration meets regularly with the Parent Coordinator as part of Attendance Team meetings to discuss systems for supporting students. Lastly, our Parent Coordinator attends Open Houses, SLCs, Curriculum Night and other functions where she is able to gain feedback from parents. 8 
