 25Q169 School Name: P.S. 169 BAY TERRACE Principal: VANESSA ROSA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S. 169 – Bay Terrace School 25Q169 342500010169 PK-5 School Number (DBN): 18-25 212 th Street Bayside, NY 11360 718-428-6160 718-224-1013 Phone Number: Fax: Vanessa Rosa vrosa@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Vanessa Rosa Jeffrey Ruditser Jenn Sharif/Colleen Patrikis Vanessa Rosa N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 25 Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Flushing NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: ddimago@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7605 Phone Number: 718-281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens North Larry Pedergast FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North lpender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Vanessa Rosa Jessamyn DePaola Jenn Sharif N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Leah Murray Christina Cromer Kristen Clancy Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Linda Yi MargBarongi Robyn D'Agostino Danielle Deenihan Melissa Gelman Dr. Kamala Watt N/A N/A N/A Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview PS 169 is dedicated to creating a nurturing and intellectually enriched environment that develops each child's unique capabilities in a home-school environment. It is our goal for all children to foster a love of learning, to stimulate critical thinking, to encourage a caring and compassionate school community, and to prepare the leaders of tomorrow. We do this by embracing cultural diversity, building understanding and tolerance of differences, fostering creativity, developing self-esteem, employing multiple teaching strategies, integrating the arts, exhibiting an elevated   degree of professionalism, maintaining high expectations and applying consistent standards for all children, encouraging active parent guardian participation, and involving the entire school and community in a commitment to excellence in all we do for children. At PS 169, we cultivate children to coexist in the garden of life while displaying their singular characteristics. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 169 is a school with a very active community which includes both families and school staff members. Involving the entire community in all of our work is a priority at P.S. 169. This is reflected in the NYC School Survey where we consistently score well above the citywide average for all elementary schools. We have many systems in place to ensure that all voices are heard which include: School website – www.ps169q.org   Class Dojo  Monthly grade level newsletters to families  Daily emails from the principal to the staff  Weekly emails from the principal to the families Shared Dropbox for staff  SLT email address – Allows families to contact SLT at any time   PTA email address – Allows families to contact PTA at any time  Accessible Parent Coordinator The following are additional areas of celebration and promising practices that we are proud of:   PROSE School - As a PROSE school we will be implementing an Advance observation option that embeds peer-observations as well implementing flexible family engagement time in order to meet the varying needs of our families. Schoolwide Enrichment – P.S. 169 has been a schoolwide enrichment school for over ten years. This year in addition to our enrichment clusters, one of our new and exciting initiatives is “Schoolwide Enrichment Thursdays” (SEM Thursdays). Thursdays will not only include interest based enrichment clusters but will also include content area project based units of study. All teachers have a parallel schedule on Thursday’s allowing teachers and students to collaborate across classrooms and grade levels for content area instruction. This not only allows us to plan high quality and rigorous content area instruction for our students but fosters the integration of Common Core Learning Standards into our instruction in a way that is engaging for everyone.  Departmentalization – In order to ensure teachers are able to become experts and delve deeply into CCLS, our third, fourth and fifth grades are departmentalized. This has also proved successful in teaching our students the executive functioning skills necessary for success in middle school, college and career.  Technology - All of our students in grades three, four and five have an iPad that they take back and forth from home and school. These iPads allow for college and career readiness and student ownership. Students are responsible for bringing these iPads back and forth from home and school daily. Most importantly, these iPads provide students with unlimited resources to support their academic growth. In addition, all classrooms have interactive white boards, document cameras and visit our state of the art computer lab weekly. Students with a special interest in technology and programming participate in out robotics enrichment cluster weekly. In addition, three of our teachers have attended Apple Academy in Cupertino, CA in order to be trained in facilitating the effective and transformative use of technology in our school.  Campus Culture – As an elementary school who shares space with a middle school where a large population of our students articulate, we work throughout the year with BELL Academy to ensure coherence, support and college and career readiness for our students. Teachers and administrators meet formally and informally throughout the school year.  Community Service – In addition to the community service projects that our enrichment clusters we participate in many school-wide community service projects including Penny Harvest, Toys for Tots and Valentines for Vets to name a few. 0   Communication - Communication has always been key at P.S. 169 and the principal personally sends out a daily email to the staff and weekly email to families. Class Dojo is another widely used venue of communication with families. Any important information, including weekly homework, long-term assignments and monthly newsletters, are posted for families to reference. In addition, we all have unlimited access to our shared Dropbox and Goggle Drive. These are places for us to share resources, best practices, curriculum maps, pictures etc. Student Facilitated Parent Teacher Conferences – Students facilitate parent teacher conferences in fourth and fifth grades. These conferences ensure that teachers, parents and students are all on the same page and further build our students’ independence in preparation for middle and high school. During the conferences, students used a protocol to share their student work, including their GLOWS and GROWS, and the tools that they are using to support their growth. Teachers were available to support families and answer any questions.  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 24% Integrated Co-Teaching Students  Specific Professional Learning for Special Education and General Education Co-Teachers & Paraprofessionals IEP Goal Writing o Co- Teaching Models o o Scaffolds and Supports for Special Education Students o Functional Behavioral Analysis o Behavior Intervention Plans 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has made the most progress in Collaborative Teachers over the past year and will focus on Rigorous Instruction for this school year. As a school that is traditionally high performing we have put a great emphasis on engaging all students in rigorous curricula. We believe that through the strategic use of data to plan instruction, all students can have access to engaging and rigorous learning opportunities. We understand that foundation of this is planning. We have put structures in place to ensure that teachers have the resources and time necessary work collaboratively in both horizontal and vertical teams, to plan high quality instruction. Planning has been embedded in the following ways:  Yearly – Planning Retreat - During this panning retreat we work with our professional development providers to review our most recent assessment data which include formative and summative data (units assessments, student work samples, conference notes) to revise our curriculum maps for the upcoming school year.  Monthly – After School Per-Session Planning Sessions – Grade-level teams participate in two after school planning sessions where they are paid per-session. During these planning sessions teachers work together, looking at data, including pre-assessment data for the upcoming units of study and plan their units of study in detail. The expectation is that teachers develop a menu of teaching points for each unit of study which includes scaffold support and enrichment activities.  Weekly – 100-minute Planning Block - Each grade-level team also has a weekly 100 minute planning block where they again, look at various data, including conference notes, to make any needed revisions for the upcoming week.  Daily – 50-minute Common Prep Periods - In addition to the weekly grade-level planning session, grade-level teams also have 3-4 additional common prep periods per week which allow them the opportunity to touch base, reflect and share on a regular basis. 1  In order to ensure coherence in the planning that is taking place across the school we also have instructional teams. Each teacher on a grade sits on one of the instructional teams. These teams are led by teachers and their work is driven by the teachers with a focus around our school goals and coherence across the school. The work that is done in these instructional team meetings is then reported back to the grade-level teams at planning sessions for feedback and implementation. Some examples of work that our instructional teams have implemented are a common language chart, questioning and discourse in math, case studies of specific students, and an enrichment unit for our extended day enrichment program. Our focus on planning and preparation has led to a high quality, rigorous, CCLS aligned curriculum that has the multiple entry points needed to support all students. All lessons in all classrooms, in all subject areas (including cluster classes) have multiple entry points embedded into the lessons. These can be seen in the form of multiple teaching points and scoffolded supports and enrichment activities. Teachers understand that when school leaders and peers are visiting classrooms we will look very specifically at the tasks that students are engaged in to ensure that they are appropriately and cognitively challenging for all students. In order to further develop our pedagogical practices, based on self reflection and various data points, this year we made a decision to continue with our instructional focus from last school year – transfer of skills and knowledge across grades and subject areas – with some revisions. Last year we worked to create rigorous CCLS aligned tasks and tools that supported students in demonstrating mastery by transferring their knowledge across subject areas and becoming more cognizant of their own learning. Since mastery is only truly achieved when students are able to demonstrate their proficiency independently and with automaticity, this year we will deepen this work by analyzing school wide data in order to monitor and revise systems. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q169 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 445 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 20 21 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A 16 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 33.0% % Attendance Rate 27.6% % Reduced Lunch 7.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 21.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 35.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.17 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 55 58 94.8% 5.4% 16.2% 5.2% 35.5% 2.5% 0 0% 8.5 78.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Rigorous Instruction Score: 4.79 = Excellent - Compared to City Average: +15% - Compared to District Average: +10% - P.S. 169 Score: 4.58 - P.S. 169 Percent Positive: 87%   Academic Press       Common Core Shifts in Math:     - P.S. 169 Percent Positive: 94% - P.S. 169 Score: 3.83 - Compared to District Average: +0% - Compared to City Average: +1% 2017-2018 NYC State Test Metric Percentages of Students at Level 3 or Level 4 in Math - 3rd Grade – 50.8% - 4th Grade – 53.0% - 5th Grade – 63.9% 4  Percentage of Students at Levels 3 or 4 in Math Comparison - P.S. 169 Score: 3.0 - Compared to Comparison Group Average: -8% - Compared to City Group Average: +14% Average Student Proficiency in Math Comparison - P.S. 169 Score: 2.95 - Compared to Comparison Group Average: -0.16 - Compared to City Group Average: +0.26 Average Student Proficiency in Math Comparison – School’s Lowest Third - P.S. 169 Score: 3.72 - Compared to Comparison Group Average: -0.01 - Compared to City Group Average: +0.17 Average Math Scores by Race/Ethnicity - White – 2.91 - Asian/Pacific Islander – 3.57 - Hispanic – 2.82 2015-2016 Quality Review Report Rigorous Instruction: Excellent - How interesting and challenging is the curriculum?: Excellent - How effective is the teaching and learning?: Excellent - How well does the school assess what students are learning?: Excellent 5  2017-2018 NY State Test Data Percentages of Students at Level 3 or Level 4 in Math - 3rd Grade – 83% - 4th Grade – 79% - 5th Grade – 74% Priority Needs - Increase performance on math state test in comparison to our comparison group averages. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all teachers of mathematics will participate in inquiry cycles and targeted professional learning around math instruction in order to deeper teachers understanding of effective mathematics instruction which will lead to an increase in students conceptual understanding and problem solving skills as measured by an increase in the percent of students above the 75th percentile from 45% in June 2018 to 55% in June 2019 as measure by the STAR Math Assessment. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning Teachers Ongoing Paraprofessionals  Continue Professional Learning Team  Continued Vertical Math Inquiry Team  Develop Math Professional Learning Plan  Provide Professional Learning Opportunities Specifically Focused on Math Content and Instruction  Participation in Algebra for All  Review Math Professional Learning Plan  Peer Inter-visitation with Math Focus  Review Math Student Data  Analyze Math Student Work and Running Records  Revise Math Professional Learning Plan  Revise Math Professional Learning Opportunities Data Collection Teachers Ongoing  Teacher Observation Data  Conduct Round 1 of Advance Observations in Math  Review Round 1 Advance Observation Data  Develop Option PROSE Structured Review Plans Based on Round 1 Advance Observation Data  Revise Inter-visitation Triads Based on Round 1 Advance Observations Data  Revise Professional Learning Plan Based on Round 1  Continue Review of Observation Data after Rounds of Advance and Inter-visitation Observations Student Data  Analyze 2018 Math State Test Data  Analyze Math Tasks  Conduct STAR Assessment Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessment in Math  Principal  Assistant Principal  Professional Learning Team  Math Inquiry Team  Algebra for All Staff FSC Staff  -Principal -Assistant Principal -Professional Learning Team -Math Inquiry Team -Classroom Teachers -FSC Staff 7  Conduct STAR Assessment Progress Monitoring Ongoing Assessments in Math  Conduct STAR Assessment End of Year Benchmark Students  Assessment in Math Student Work - Analyze student work with a focus on rigorous math tasks. -Principal -Assistant Principal September/ October January / February Teachers/ Students Teachers/ Students Round 1 Benchmark - September/October  Administer STAR Assessment Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessment in Math Identify Students for Math Intervention   Place Students in Guided Math Groups  Administer Classroom Math Assessments Including One on One Conferring Round 2 Benchmark - January/February  Administer STAR Assessment Middle of Year   Benchmark Assessment in Math Identify Students for Phasing Out/Phasing Into Math Intervention Identify Students for Differentiated Test Preparation Programs  Revise Students Guided Math Groups  Administer Classroom Math Assessments Including One on One Conferring Round 3 Benchmark - May/June  Administer STAR Assessment End of Year Benchmark  Assessment in Math Identify Students for Phasing Out/Phasing Into Math Intervention  Revise Students Guided Math Groups  Administer Classroom Math Assessments Including One on One Conferring 8  May / June -Professional Learning Team -Math Inquiry Team -Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Key Personnel:  Administrators  Teachers  Parent Coordinator   Algebra for All Staff FSC Staff Information and Access for Families: Family Handbook - September   Online Calendar - September - June  Monthly Newsletters from Teachers with Math Concepts Taught and Assessment Criteria Included - September - June  Email from Principal with Information and Updates - September - June 9   Updates through Class Dojo - Daily Workshops for Families:  Understanding of the Next Generation Math Standards  Algebra for All  Math Games  Everyday Math Skills Practice  Rigorous Math Tasks  STAR Assessment Materials and Resources to Support Families:  Provide Access to Next Generation Aligned Resources Through Class Websites and Class Dojo  Provide Access to Algebra for All Resources Through Class Websites and Class Dojo  Translation Services  Flexible Scheduling of Meetings/Activities Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Personnel  Professional Learning Team  Math Inquiry Team  Algebra for All  FSC Instructional Support Specialists Per-Session  Team Meetings Per-Diem  Substitute Teachers to Cover Classroom Teachers Programs During Professional Learning OTPS  Materials to Support Professional Learning  Materials to Support Instruction  Math Tools and Manipulatives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 0  Summer 2018  Teachers - Summative Conferences/Reflection  Students – STAR Math Assessment Data & New York State Math Test Data September/October 2018  Teachers - Initial Planning Conferences/Goal Setting  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 1  Students - STAR Assessment Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessment November 2018  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 1  Students – Classroom Assessments December 2018  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 1 January/February 2019  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 2  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 2  Students - STAR Assessment Middle of Year Benchmark Assessment March 2019  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 2  Students – Classroom Assessments April 2019  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 3 May/June 2019  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 3  Teachers - Summative Conferences/Reflection   Students - STAR Assessment End of Year Benchmark Assessment Students – New York State Math Test Data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Danielson Framework for Teaching  Advance Observation Data   Classroom Assessments STAR Assessment 1  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Measures Supportive Environment  Classroom Behavior  P.S. 169 Percent Positive: 86%  P.S. 169 Score: 4.13  Compared to District Average: +3%  Compared to City Average: +11% Safety   P.S. 169 Percent Positive: 88%  P.S. 169 Score: 3.30  Compared to District Average: -6%  Compared to City Average: -1% Social Emotional  Compared to City Average: +5%  Compared to District Average: +0%  P.S. 169 Score: 3.83  P.S. 169 Percent Positive: 91% 2017-2018 OORS Data  Total Number of Incidents: 90      Level 1 (Uncooperative/Noncompliant Behavior) – 8 Level 2 (Disorderly Behavior) – 13 Level 3 (Disruptive Behavior) – 46 Level 4 (Aggressive or Injurious/Harmful Behavior) – 22 Level 5 (Seriously Dangerous or Violent Behavior) – 1 2015-2016 Quality Review Report  Supportive Environment: Excellent 3   How clearly are high expectations communicated to students and staff?: Excellent Priority Needs  Supporting students in managing emotions and mediating conflicts without displaying disruptive, aggressive or dangerous behavior. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all staff, students, and families will engage in learning opportunities around Social Emotional Learning through professional learning, parent workshops and daily S.E.E.D (Social Emotional Education Daily) time for students which will lead to a 10% decrease level three and four infractions from June 2018 to June 2019. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Teachers  Paraprofessionals   School Aides Support Staff September - June  Principal  Assistant Principal  Professional    Learning Team School Psychologist School Social Worker School Guidance Counselor  Principal  Assistant Principal  Professional   Learning Team School Psychologist School Social Worker  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning  Continue Professional Learning Team  Develop Social Emotional Learning Professional Learning Plan  Provide Professional Learning Opportunities Specifically Focused on Social Emotional Learning for All Staff Including Anchor Training, S.E.E.D. Time, Sanford Harmony, Beautiful Me, Mindfulness  Participation in Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence Anchor Training for Key Support Staff  Participation in Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence Feeling Words Curriculum for Key Support Staff  Review and Analyze OORS Data  Review and Analyze Social Emotional Learning Survey Data  Revise Social Emotional Learning Professional Learning Plan OORS Data Students September - June  Analyze 2018 OORS Data  Review OORS Data Monthly   Conduct Social Emotional Learning Beginning Social Emotional Learning Survey of Year Survey  Conduct Social Emotional Learning Middle of Year Survey  Conduct Social Emotional Learning End of Year Survey 5   School Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Key Personnel:  Administrators  Teachers  Parent Coordinator School Psychologist  School Social Worker   Guidance Counselor Information and Access for Families: Family Handbook - September   Online Calendar - September - June  Monthly Newsletters from Teachers - September - June  Email from Principal with Information and Updates - September - June  Updates through Class Dojo - Daily Workshops for Families:  Understanding of Social Emotional Learning  Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence Anchor Training  Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence Feeling Words Curriculum    Guidance Workshops Sanford Harmony Social Emotional Learning Survey Materials and Resources to Support Families:  Provide Access  Translation Services  Flexible Scheduling of Meetings/Activities Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Personnel    School Psychologist School Social Worker School Guidance Counselor Per-Session  Team Meetings  Professional Development  Parent Workshops Per-Diem   Substitutes to Cover Teachers Substitutes to Cover Paraprofessionals OTPS Social Emotional Learning Professional Development at Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence   Playworks Professional Development   Various Social Emotional Learning Materials Social Emotional Learning Survey Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. September 2018 Social Emotional Learning Survey   OORS Incident by Infraction Type Report  OORS Hourly Analysis Report  OORS Incident Location Summary Report November 2018 Social Emotional Learning Survey   OORS Incident by Infraction Type Report  OORS Hourly Analysis Report  OORS Incident Location Summary Report February 2019  Social Emotional Learning Survey 7   OORS Incident by Infraction Type Report  OORS Hourly Analysis Report  OORS Incident Location Summary Report June 2019 Social Emotional Learning Survey   OORS Incident by Infraction Type Report  OORS Hourly Analysis Report  OORS Incident Location Summary Report Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Social Emotional Learning Survey   OORS Incident by Infraction Type Report  OORS Hourly Analysis Report  OORS Incident Location Summary Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 School Quality Guide  Rigorous Instruction Score: 4.79 = Excellent Academic Press  P.S. 169 Percent Positive: 87%  P.S. 169 Score: 4.58  Compared to District Average: +10%  Compared to City Average: +15% Common Core Shifts in Math:  P.S. 169 Percent Positive: 94%  P.S. 169 Score: 3.83  Compared to District Average: +0%  Compared to City Average: +1% 2016-2017 NYC State Test Metrics Percentages of Students at Level 3 or Level 4 in Math  3rd Grade – 50.8%  4th Grade – 53.0%  5th Grade – 63.9% Percentage of Students at Levels 3 or 4 in Math Comparison  P.S. 169 Score: 3.0  Compared to Comparison Group Average: -8%  Compared to City Group Average: +14% Average Student Proficiency in Math Comparison  P.S. 169 Score: 2.95  Compared to Comparison Group Average: -0.16 9   Compared to City Group Average: +0.26 Average Student Proficiency in Math Comparison – School’s Lowest Third  P.S. 169 Score: 3.72  Compared to Comparison Group Average: -0.01  Compared to City Group Average: +0.17 Average Math Scores by Race/Ethnicity  White – 2.91  Asian/Pacific Islander – 3.57  Hispanic – 2.82 2015-2016 Quality Review Report Rigorous Instruction: Excellent  How interesting and challenging is the curriculum?: Excellent  How effective is the teaching and learning?: Excellent  How well does the school assess what students are learning?: Excellent Priority Needs  Increase performance on math state test in comparison to our comparison group averages. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will participate in a minimum of two peer inter-visitations, with a focus on designing rigorous instruction through teacher created tasks, resulting in a 25% increase in in Highly Effective Advance ratings across component 3c-Engaging Students in Learning from 0% in June 2018 to 25% in June 2019. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Teachers September - June Professional Learning Team  Continue Professional Learning Team  Continued Vertical Inquiry Teams  Develop Professional Learning Plan  Provide Professional Learning Opportunities Specifically Focused on Content and Instruction  Review Professional Learning Plan  Peer Inter-visitations  Review Student Data with a Focus on Subgroup Data  Analyze Math Student Work and Running Records  Revise Math Professional Learning Plan  Revise Math Professional Learning Opportunities Principal Assistant Principal FSC Instructional Support Staff Teacher Observation Data Teachers September - June -Principal  Conduct Round 1 of Advance Observations in Math  Review Round 1 Advance Observation Data  Develop Option PROSE Structured Review Plans Based on Round 1 Advance Observation Data  Revise Inter-visitation Triads Based on Round 1 Advance Observations Data  Revise Professional Learning Plan Based on Round 1  Continue Review of Observation Data after Rounds of Advance and Inter-visitation Observations -Assistant Principal -Professional Learning Team -Math Inquiry Team -Classroom Teachers -FSC Staff 1  Student Data - Focus on Subgroup Data  Analyze 2018 State Test Data  Analyze Tasks  Conduct STAR Assessment Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessments, Progress Monitoring Assessments, End of Year Benchmark Assessments  Conduct Fountas and Pinnell Beginning of year Benchmark Assessments, Progress Monitoring Assessments, End of Year Benchmark Assessments  Conduct DIBELS Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessments, Progress Monitoring Assessments, End of Year Benchmark Assessments Student Work - Analyze student work with a focus on rigorous tasks.  Round 1 Benchmark - September/October  Administer STAR Assessment Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessment  Administer Fountas and Pinnell Beginning of year Benchmark Assessments  Administer DIBELS Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessments Identify Students for Intervention   Place Students in Guided Groups  Administer Classroom Assessments Including One on One Conferring Round 2 Benchmark - January/February  Administer STAR Assessment Middle of Year Benchmark Assessment  Administer Fountas and Pinnell Middle of year Benchmark Assessments Administer DIBELS Middle of Year Benchmark Assessments   Identify Students for Phasing Out/Phasing Into Intervention Identify Students for Differentiated Test Preparation Programs  Revise Students Guided Groups  Administer Classroom Assessments Including One on One Conferring Round 3 Benchmark - May/June  Administer STAR Assessment End of Year Benchmark Assessment Students Teachers/ Students Teachers/ Students September/ October January /February -Principal -Assistant Principal -Professional Learning Team -Math Inquiry Team -Classroom Teachers -FSC Staff - Algebra for All Staff -Principal -Assistant Principal -Professional Learning Team -Math Inquiry Team -Classroom Teachers -Principal -Assistant Principal May /June -Professional Learning Team -Math Inquiry Team 2  Administer Fountas and Pinnell End of Year Benchmark Assessments  Administer DIBELS End of Year Benchmark Assessments  Identify Students for Phasing Out/Phasing Into Intervention  Revise Students Guided Groups  Administer Classroom Assessments Including One on One Conferring Teachers / Students -Classroom Teachers -Principal -Assistant Principal -Professional Learning Team -Math Inquiry Team -Classroom Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Key Personnel:  Administrators  Teachers  Parent Coordinator   Algebra for All Staff FSC Staff Information and Access for Families: Family Handbook - September   Online Calendar - September - June  Monthly Newsletters from Teachers with Math Concepts Taught and Assessment Criteria Included - September - June  Email from Principal with Information and Updates - September - June  Updates through Class Dojo - Daily Workshops for Families:  Understanding of the Next Generation Standards  Algebra for All  Universal Literacy  Balanced Literacy 3  STAR Assessment Fountas and Pinnell Assessment    DIBELS Assessment Materials and Resources to Support Families:  Provide Access to Next Generation Aligned Resources Through Class Websites and Class Dojo  Provide Access to Algebra for All Resources Through Class Websites and Class Dojo  Translation Services  Flexible Scheduling of Meetings/Activities Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Personnel Inquiry Teams  Professional Learning Team   Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Staff Developers  Universal Literacy Coach  Algebra for All Coach  FSC Instructional Support Specialists Per-Session  Team Meetings  Per-Diem  Substitute Teachers to Cover Classroom Teachers Programs During Professional Learning OTPS  Materials to Support Professional Learning  Materials to Support Instruction Student Tools and Manipulatives  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Summer 2018  Teachers - Summative Conferences/Reflection  Students – STAR Math Assessment Data & New York State Math Test Data September/October 2018 4   Teachers - Initial Planning Conferences/Goal Setting  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 1    Students - STAR Assessment Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessment Students - Fountas and Pinnell Assessment Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessment Students - DIBELS Assessment Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessment November 2018  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 1  Students – Classroom Assessments December 2018  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 1  Students – Classroom Assessments January/February 2019  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 2  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 2    Students - STAR Assessment Middle of Year Benchmark Assessment Students - Fountas and Pinnell Assessment Middle of Year Benchmark Assessment Students - DIBELS Assessment Middle of Year Benchmark Assessment March 2019  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 2  Students – Classroom Assessments April 2019  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 3 May/June 2019  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 3  Teachers - Summative Conferences/Reflection     Students - STAR Assessment End of Year Benchmark Assessment Students - Fountas and Pinnell Assessment End of Year Benchmark Assessment Students - DIBELS Assessment End of Year Benchmark Assessment Students – New York State Math Test Data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Danielson Framework for Teaching  Advance Observation Data    DIBELS Assessment  Classroom Assessments STAR Assessment Fountas and Pinnell Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2016-2017 State Test Metrics ELA Percentages of Students at Level 3 or Level 4 in ELA - 3rd Grade – 44.4% - 4th Grade – 65.2% - 5th Grade – 37.7% Percentage of Students at Levels 3 or 4 in ELA Comparison - P.S. 169 Score: 1.94 - Compared to Comparison Group Average: -11% Average Student Proficiency in ELA Comparison - P.S. 169 Score: 2.00 - Compared to Comparison Group Average: -0.22 Average Student Proficiency in ELA Comparison – School’s Lowest Third - P.S. 169 Score: 4.28 - Compared to Comparison Group Average: -0.22 Math Percentages of Students at Level 3 or Level 4 in Math 6  - 3rd Grade – 50.8% - 4th Grade – 53.0% - 5th Grade – 63.9% Percentage of Students at Levels 3 or 4 in Math Comparison - P.S. 169 Score: 3.0 - Compared to Comparison Group Average: -8% Average Student Proficiency in Math Comparison - P.S. 169 Score: 2.95 - Compared to Comparison Group Average: -0.16 Average Student Proficiency in Math Comparison – School’s Lowest Third - P.S. 169 Score: 3.72 - Compared to Comparison Group Average: -0.01 2017-2018 State Test Data Percentages of Students at Level 3 or Level 4 in ELA - 3rd Grade – 58% - 4th Grade – 60% - 5th Grade – 63% Percentages of Students at Level 3 or Level 4 in Math - 3rd Grade – 83% - 4th Grade – 79% - 5th Grade – 74% Priority Needs  Increase performance on state test in comparison to our comparison group averages. Part 2 – Annual Goal 7  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 school leaders will promote the success of every student by facilitating the development, articulation, implementation, and stewardship of a vision of learning that is shared by all stakeholders and regularly evaluating strategic processes and structures to promote the school's continuous and sustainable improvement as measured by a rating of highly effective in Domain 1 - Shared Vision for Learning on the Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning Teachers September - June -Principal Paraprofessionals -Assistant Principal Support Staff Sharing school goals  Developing a school vision   Action Planning  Cycles of Learning  Continue Professional Learning Team  Continued Vertical Inquiry Teams  Develop Professional Learning Plans  Provide Professional Learning Opportunities o Review Professional Learning Plan  Peer Inter-visitation w  Review Student Data  Analyze Student Work and Running Records  Revise Professional Learning Plan  Revise Professional Learning Opportunities -Professional Learning Team -Inquiry Teams -Classroom Teachers -FSC Staff -Algebra for All Staff -Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Staff Data Collection Teacher Observation Data  Conduct Round 1 of Advance Observations  Review Round 1 Advance Observation Data  Develop Option PROSE Structured Review Plans Based on Round 1 Advance Observation Data  Revise Inter-visitation Triads Based on Round 1 Advance Observations Data  Revise Professional Learning Plan Based on Round 1  Continue Review of Observation Data after Rounds of Advance and Inter-visitation Observations Teachers Students September - June -Principal -Assistant Principal -Professional Learning Team -Inquiry Teams -Classroom Teachers -FSC Staff -Algebra for All Staff 9 -Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Staff Student Data  Analyze 2018 ELA and Math State Test Data  Analyze ELA and Math Tasks  Conduct STAR Assessment Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessment in ELA and Math  Conduct STAR Assessment Progress Monitoring Assessments in ELA and Math  Conduct STAR Assessment End of Year Benchmark  Assessment in ELA and Math Student Work - Analyze student work with a focus on rigorous ELA and math tasks. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Key Personnel:  Administrators  Teachers  Parent Coordinator   Algebra for All Staff  Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Staff FSC Staff Information and Access for Families: Family Handbook - September   Online Calendar - September - June  Monthly Newsletters from Teachers with Math Concepts Taught and Assessment Criteria Included - September - June  Email from Principal with Information and Updates - September - June  Updates through Class Dojo - Daily Workshops for Families:  Understanding of the Next Generation ELA and Math Standards  Balanced Literacy  The Five Pillars of Reading  Algebra for All  Math Games  Everyday Math Skills Practice  Rigorous Math Tasks 0  STAR Assessment Materials and Resources to Support Families:  Provide Access to Next Generation Aligned Resources Through Class Websites and Class Dojo  Provide Access to Algebra for All Resources Through Class Websites and Class Dojo  Translation Services  Flexible Scheduling of Meetings/Activities Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Personnel Inquiry Teams  Professional Learning Team   Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Staff Developers  Algebra for All  FSC Instructional Support Specialists Per-Session  Team Meetings  Professional Development  Planning Sessions Per-Diem  Substitute Teachers to Cover Classroom Teachers Programs During Professional Learning OTPS  Materials to Support Professional Learning  Materials to Support Instruction Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  Summer 2018  Teachers - Summative Conferences/Reflection  Students – STAR ELA and Math Assessment Data & New York State ELA and Math Test Data September/October 2018  Teachers - Initial Planning Conferences/Goal Setting  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 1  Students - STAR Assessment Beginning of Year Benchmark Assessment November 2018  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 1  Students – Classroom Assessments December 2018  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 1  Students – Classroom Assessments January/February 2019  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 2  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 2  Students - STAR Assessment Middle of Year Benchmark Assessment March 2019  Teachers - Peer Inter-visitation Round 2  Students – Classroom Assessments April 2019  Teachers - Advance Observation Round 3 May/June 2019 2   Teachers - Advance Observation Round 3  Teachers - Summative Conferences/Reflection   Students - STAR Assessment End of Year Benchmark Assessment Students – New York State ELA and Math Test Data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  MPPR  Danielson Framework for Teaching  Advance Observation Data   Classroom Assessments STAR Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Rigorous Instruction Score: 4.40 = Excellent  Compared to District Average: +0.43  Compared to City Average: +0.61 Outreach to Parents  P.S. 169 Percent Positive: 98%  P.S. 169 Score: 4.60  Compared to District Average: +1%  Compared to City Average: +3% Parent Involvement in School  P.S. 169 Percent Positive: 94%  P.S. 169 Score: 4.00  Compared to District Average: +4%  Compared to City Average: +4% 2017-2018 NYC School Survey    Families of a child in an Individualized Education Program (IEP) say that they are satisfied with the educational planning and IEP development process at their school - 84% Families of a child in an Individualized Education Program (IEP) say that their school works to achieve the goals on their child’s IEP - 81% Families of a child in an Individualized Education Program (IEP) say that their school offers a wide variety of activities and services to help improve life outcomes for their child - 71% 2015-2016 Quality Review Indicator 3.4 - A culture of learning that communicates and supports high expectations Score: 4.99    Rating: Well Developed Priority Needs 4   Increase Families Knowledge of Individualized Education Plans Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, families of students with Individualized Education Plans will have opportunities to collaborate with teachers, school support staff, and other families throughout the school year by attending, three one on one meetings with their child’s teacher regarding their child’s Individualized Education Plan and specialized after-school professional learning targeted to understanding IEP’s and the various services their child receives leading to student academic progress as measured by an increase in 10% percent of IEP students meeting proficiency on the NY State ELA tests from 20% in ELA and 44% in math in June 2018 to 30% in ELA and 45% in math in June 2019. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Teachers September - June -Principal Individualized Education Plans   Behavior Intervention Plans  Mental Health   Occupational Therapy  Behavioral Therapy Speech -Assistant Principal -Lead Teachers -School Psychologist -School Social Worker -Guidance Counselor -Support Staff (OT, PT Speech) - Parent Coordinator Data Collection Families December Parent Coordinator School Quality Guide   NYC School Survey   Workshop Feedback Forms School Created Family Involvement Survey March June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Key Personnel:  Administrators  Teachers  Parent Coordinator   Guidance Counselor School Based Support Team 6   School Social Worker Information and Access for Families: Family Handbook - September   Online Calendar - September - June  Monthly Newsletters from Teachers - September - June  Email from Principal with Information and Updates - September - June  Updates through Class Dojo - Daily  One on one meetings with families of IEP Students Workshops for Families: Individualized Education Plans Speech   Behavior Intervention Plans  Mental Health   Occupational Therapy  Behavioral Therapy  Social Emotional Learning Materials and Resources to Support Families:  Provide Access  Translation Services  Flexible Scheduling of Meetings/Activities Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Personnel  Principal  Assistant Principal  Parent Coordinator School Psychologist  School Social Worker   Guidance Counselor  Support Staff (OT, PT Speech) OTPS  Materials for Family Workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. September / October 2018  One on one conferences with Individualized Education Plan families    Workshop Feedback Forms Fall Family Night attendance School Created Family Involvement Survey November 2018 / December 2018 School Created Family Involvement Survey   Workshop Feedback Forms January / February 2019  One on one conferences with Individualized Education Plan families   Workshop Feedback Forms School Created Family Involvement Survey March / April 2019  Parent Teacher conferences  Workshop Feedback Form May / June 2019  One on one conferences with Individualized Education Plan families   School Created Family Involvement Survey School Quality Guide Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Quality Guide   NYC School Survey   Workshop Feedback Forms School Created Family Involvement Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NY State Assessment Test Scores Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Leveled Literacy Intervention Small Group During the School Day STAR Assessment Reading Rescue F&PAssessment Pre-Teaching Conference Notes Re-Teaching Student Work Individualized Tools NY State Assessment Test Scores Pre-Teaching Mathematics One on One Small Group During the School Day Re-Teaching One on One Individualized Tools STAR Assessment Math Chapter Assessments Conference Notes Student Work Conference Notes Science Pre-Teaching Small Group Student Work Re-Teaching One on One Social Studies Conference Notes Individualized Tools Pre-Teaching Small Group Student Work Re-Teaching One on One During the School Day During the School Day 9  Individualized Tools At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Pupil Personnel Team Referral by Teacher(s) Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports Observations Small Group During the School Day One on One Social Emotional Learning Banana Splits 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 4  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [School name] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [School name] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) [School name] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 8  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 9  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 0  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 1  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> The PS169 Title III After School Program will be open to English Language Learners in grades 1-5 in order to help them meet the Common Core Learning Standards for English as a New Language and English Language Arts. There will be two after school programs offered at our school. According to NYSESLAT data the students who are at the levels of entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding will be offered this program. This is a total of 15 students. There will be 9 third graders. One fourth grader and 5 fifth graders. They will be put into the following subgroups. Entering/emerging: Qifeng, Manuel, Meng Chen, Siwon Transitioning/Expanding: David, Stacey, Chloe, dean, Eunice, Siwoo Commanding: MinSeon, Shin Hoo, Evan, Siji, Nisa Program 1 - Open to ENL students who are required to take the NYS ELA test. The program will run during the months of January/February. One certified ENL teacher and a upper grade teacher will facilitate the program. The program will be 6 weeks long and run the weeks of February 11th-March 25th and take place twice per week for one hour sessions. The days will be Tuesday and Thursday. This will be a total of 12 sessions. Each parent will receive a written notification in their home language explaining the program and what is being offered. Also a message via ClassDojo will be sent out to all ENL parents whose child qualifies for this after school program. Students will receive focused instruction that best prepares them to meet the rigor of the exam. The students will receive instruction using the IReady and NY Ready test prep materials. The student's attendance will be maintained by the certified ENL teacher. Weekly on demand assessments mocking the Day 1 and Day 2 of the NYSELA test using the IReady books will be given as well. The records will be maintained by the teacher and will be put into a shared document to review and make changes to the program accordingly. The students invited to the following program will be according to data. This data is according to NYSESLAT data and the NYSITELL data, (which we do not have yet.) I will input that by early next week. Entering and Emerging students according to NYSESLAT data: QiFeng, Isabella Cruz, Manuel Cruz, Meng Chen and Siwon Yoo. Program 2 - Open to all ELL students, whose proficiency levels are Entering & Emerging as well as newcomers. The data used to determine whether or not a child will be offered this opportunity , is the Fountas and Pinnell testing done throughout the school year. Those students who are not meeting benchmark in April for their specific grade will be invited to attend. Meetings will be held with each teacher to discuss the needs of each specific student. The program will be 6 weeks long, run during the months of April/May and take place twice per week for one hour sessions. It will start the week of April 16th-May 28th and take place Tuesday and Thursdays. Each parent will receive a written notification in their home language explaining the program and what is being offered. Also a message via ClassDojo will be sent out to all ENL parents whose child qualifies for this after school program. One certified teacher will facilitate the program. This program will focus on the Five Pillars of Reading. There will be a strong emphasis on building 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information phonics and phonemic awareness which will build English fluency to the ENL learners. The program will use Fundations and language lessons focused around phonemic awareness. The student's attendance will be maintained by the certified ENL teacher. A mid-session assessment will be given, the teachers will use this data to determine the next steps for the last three weeks of the program. PD For All Programs - Teachers who support ELL students will plan with Ms. Salvador, whom is the licensed ENL teacher. She will provide and support the teachers on scaffolding techniques such as: modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, meta-cognitive development, text deconstruction and text representation. The teachers will employ a wide range of techniques and strategies consistent with successful English language acquisition. Thinking maps, lists, charts, and consistent structure will help aid children in their forward growth. Ms. Salvador will support teachers in assuring children will work in partnerships when applicable to help improve their skills in Reading, Writing, Speaking and Listening and that lessons target both content and English language objectives. Materials For All Programs - Books are also available in the students' home languages for classroom use and for parents to read at home. At PS169, we offer a range of technology such as Triumph Boards, laptops and iPads. These will be regularly available for student use. The students will use iReady, NY Ready and NYSESLAT materials to help facilitate their growth. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Our ENL teacher will regularly provide professional development for teachers after school beginning in October 2018. The co-facilitator will be Caroline Japutra (Grade K). The two facilitators have participated in the 2017-2018 D25 Language Learner Series which focused on Maryann Cucchiara's work. An agenda and attendance will be created and taken by the co-facilitators. These sessions will be held Tuesday and Thursday. (Specific dates pending availability) Each session will run from 2:30PM-3:30PM.The teachers participating will be the teachers in the ENL classrooms. Those teacher required to participate will be Christina Cromer (Grade 1), Lyzz RothSinger (Grade 2), Teresa Schweiger (Upper Grade Social Studies), Veronica Morales (Upper Grade Science). All other teachers will be invited to join these sessions. Rationale: Professional Development is most effective when it occurs in the context of an educators daily work. It can help educators analyze student achievement, identify need and develop solutions. The goals for these professional development sessions will be: - Delving into Maryann Cucchiara work with complex and compelling text. - Embedding language development within the content area for all grades. - Remaining consistent and up-to-date with the most current information around ENL trends. - Aligning ENL instruction to Next Generation Standards. - Skills and strategies that best help to support ELL students in mastering the English language. 5  Part C: Professional Development The ENL teacher herself will actively attend and participate in Field Support Center and district level professional development offerings around best practices for ELL students. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->In an effort to engage the maximum number of ELL parents we support directly we will be offering three parents workshops this year. Each workshop will be facilitated by our ENL teacher, and translated into other languages. We will hire translators from the NYCDOE translation unit to help facilitate workshops. These workshops will provide materials and instructional strategies that will enhance the school-home connection. Workshops will serve to support parents of ELL students and provide them with ways in which they may support their children at home. Parent workshops can help the parents learn more about what is expected of their child in the upcoming year and how to better prepare them for this academic growth. It is also important for parents to learn how to set their child up for success and give them an opportunity to ask questions about any concerns they may have. These sessions will last for 60 minutes an will include information and activities related to "Understanding School Culture and Procedures", "Suggestions and Techniques for working with your child in Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing" and "What Standards Must Be Met in Order to Pass the NYSESLAT." Workshops will be held in September, December and February on three Tuesday evenings. An attendance sheet will be provided for all attendees to sign-in as well as an agenda created by the ENL teacher. Parents will also be invited into the school for a celebration that recognizes the achievements that students have made during the year. When necessary, bilingual teachers and paraprofessionals in the building will serve to make phone calls to parents so that important information is communicated at a rate consistent with our English speaking families. All records, etc. as well as signed parental consent slips to participate in the Title III After School Program are kept on file with the ENL teacher. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A  High quality staff N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Bay Terrace School Borough Queens School Number 169 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Vanessa Rosa Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Joycelyn Phipps Teacher/Subject Area Christina Kaidas Teacher/Subject Area Rochelle Curran Related-Service Provider Stephanie Kranz Superintendent Danielle DiMango Assistant Principal Leah Murray Coach N/A School Counselor Yang Synn Parent Jenn Sharif Parent Coordinator Orit Foresta Field Support Center Staff Member Ying Ying (Jenny) An Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 2 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 396 8 Total number of ELLs 33 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.33%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tool that is used to assess the early literacy skills of the ELL's at PS 169 Bay Terrace school is the Teachers College Reading Writing Project. Using this program for our MOSL, Measure of Student Learning, we are able to assess them on reading fiction texts, concepts about print, letter/sound identification, high frequency words, and writing assessments. The TCRWP offers a set of informal reading inventories for narrative texts which correlates to the Fountas and Pinnell system for leveling books. These assessments help teachers identify which level of texts students can read independently and will therefore be able to practice all the reading strategies they are learning during the reading workshop. The insights the data provide about the ELL's is how much comprehension and fluency that the student have. In order to judge comprehension, the ELL's are asked to retell the text and then answer comprehension questions. Students need to give a strong retelling of the story or answer 3 of the 4 comprehension questions correctly in order to read independently at that level. ESL students may use the text to help them retell, and the teacher takes note if the student does this. While testing the 9  ESL student for fluency, we look for quick recognition of high frequency words, beginning to read in phrases instead of word-by-word, and responding to punctuation with expression or tonal variation in voice. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Students are tested quarterly by classroom teachers with the assistance of out of classroom teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: The success of the ESL program is evaluated through ESL assessments, the ELA, and the NYSESLAT. The success of our program for ELL's is evaluated each year by the academic performance of our students. Some of the data sources that are analyzed include but are not limited to: NYSESLAT scores, ELA scores, Math scores, and ELL Periodic Assessment scores. The results of these assessments show that our students are benefiting from instruction in both push-in and pull-out classes. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data is gathered, we look at the most challenging target area for each student. We adjust our lesson plans with needed tools to support the ELL's in that area of need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: Within the RTI framework, teachers uses data daily to guide their planning and instruction. During the Universal Screening stage, screening assessments allows teachers to identify weakness through benchmarks and criteria. During the Strong Core Instruction Stage, data is used to help students create meaningful conversations, use complex thinking, and develop literacy. Data is used to create intensive, targeted instruction. last, we monitor progress through data. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Students are grouped according to levels and grades. By reviewing the data patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and grades, it is revealed that students become proficient in the listening/speaking section of the tests. While reviewing patterns across the NYSESLAT modalities, lessons will be created to strengthen student weaknesses. It is observed that across the board, the reading/writing modalities are the weakest area. School leadership and the ELL department are using the results of the ELL periodic assessment, NYSITELL, and NYSESLAT by finding the weaknesses of the student and guiding instruction to support the weaknesses. During the Fall 2015 NYSITELL assessments, 2 students scored Entering, 0 students scored Transitioning, and 3 students scored Expanding. It is revealed that the majority of the students are advanced ENL students. We observe the scores of the ELL students while assessing them. If the students are not achieving their reading level, the ELL program is adjusted to help the students improve. That is how we evaluate the success of the ELL program. Overall, the results of the NYSESLAT test last Spring indicate steady progress in all four modalities. On the 2015 NYSESLAT exam seven students obtained the commanding level, 2 in kindergarten, 3 in 1 st grade, 1 in 4 th grade. There was 1 student that was exempt from the 2015 NYSESLAT because she obtained a 3 on the ELA in 4 th grade. The program enforces all the modalities on the NYSESLAT. For example, listening skills are developed by reading aloud from a variety of fiction and non-fiction texts. Speaking is emphasized by creating opportunities for ELL's to speak on literature the class has read, or giving them a chance to read a piece of written work they have created themselves. The reading done in the ESL class is a reinforcement of the Teachers College units of study and genres being studies in the classrooms. We evaluate the 0  success of our program for our EL'Ls using data from state assessments, interim assessments, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project assessments, teacher-made assessments, conferencing, portfolios, and goal setting. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During planning time with classroom teachers, data information about the ELL's are shared in order to adjust plans properly. Also, data is shared with the students. Once the students know their data, glows and grows are created. with the students. Students focus on their weak areas, and come up with a strategy with their ELL and classroom teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: The ENL program that is used at PS 169 is Integrated ENL. This program is used to build English language skills through content area instruction. Ms.Phipps co-teaches alongside the classroom teacher using ENL strategies to deliver content area subject matter. The Integrated ENL program is delivered through a Push-in and Pull-Out Model. In the Push-In model Ms.Phipps works with ELL's in collaboration with the classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support. There is common preparation time between the 2 teachers to plan and collaborate. The ELL's are also brought together from various classes for English acquisition -focused instruction, the Pull-Out Model. Ms.Phipps continues to plan carefully with general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment and continuity of instruction.There are four groups and they are grouped heterogenously. Group A is Kindergarten and the students are entering, transitioning and expanding students. Group B has 1 st and 2 nd grade and it is mixed with expanding and commanding students. Group C has3rd and 4 th graders and it is mixed with emergent, expanding, and commanding students. Group D is the 5 th grade group that has an emergent and commanding student. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? There are 5 proficiency levels for ELL's based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. The beginner level, Entering, students receive 360 minutes a week which is 8 periods. The low intermediate level, Emerging, students receive 360 minutes a week which 8 periods. The intermediate level, Transitioning, students receive 180 minutes a week which is 4 periods. The advanced level, which is Expanding, students receive 180 minutes a week which is 4 periods. Last, the proficient level, Commanding, these students receive 90 minutes a week , 2 periods, of integrated instruction time. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 1  During a Readers Workshop lesson, the ESL teacher provide students with small group instruction by following the Teachers College workshop model. This supports learning in the four modalities in English as they learn new strategies during Reader's and Writer's workshop. During Writers workshop the ESL teacher provide students with small group instruction utilizing a model of instruction for writing following the Teachers College writing process. They begin each session with a mini-lesson and then conduct small group strategy lessons to target their writing goals/needs based on their notebooks entries and published pieces. The ESL teacher also incorporate shared writing and interactive writing during strategy lessons to enrich language development. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: Native language support is present in our ESL program through the use of native language texts for cross-cultural learning, realia, dictionaries/glossaries, visual aids, and partnerships between ELLs of the same language to support them academically and socially as members of our school community. We ensure that ELL's are appropriately evaluated in their native language by providing them translators during state tests or giving them the state test in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our instructional Plan for SIFE students will incorporate intervention and emotional support from our guidance counselor. These students will receive the mandated number of minutes per week of ESL instruction based on their proficiency level and in accordance with the NYS CR Part 154. We will provide the students with supplementary reading intervention program based on their reading needs during the day, wich will be in addition to their ESL services. They will be invited to attend extended day program which is help for 50 minutes on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursdays after school. Programs that will be utilized are Leap Frog, Mondo Pathways to Writing, and Moving into English. Based on data from numerous assessments, instruction is differentiated. The ELL's in our school that are here less than three years (new comers) receive the mandated number of minutes per week of ESL instruction based on their proficiency level and in accordance with the NYS CR Part154. Emotional support is provided by our guidance counselor to help themembrace the American culture during the month of September. They will receive constant exposure to vocabulary and literacy instruction using a variety of manipulatives and pictures. The same programs used for SIFE students will also be used for this sub group. In addition to those programs, Voyager is also implemented. Our 4-6 year ELL's receive the mandated number of minutes per week of ESL instruction based on their proficiency level in accordance with the NYS CR Part 154. Within the mandated instructional time, these students receive small group instruction in writing, which has been identifies as an area that needs improvement. Writing goals are created for this subgroup which emphasize pre-writing, creating paragraphs, topic sentences, sentence variety, and editing. Long Term ELL's will receive the mandated number of minutes per week of ESL instruction based on their proficiency level and in accordance with NYS CR Part 154. We will provide these students with a supplementary intervention program to support their reading and writing needs based on their levels. Supplementary intervention programs that will be utilized are Voyager, Rygby On Our Way to English, Mondo Pathways to Writing, Empire State NYSESLAT , and Attanasio and Associates Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and Beyond. Our plan for transitional support for students who reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT: The ESL teacher conferences with the classroom teacher to monitor continued development. These students are offered the opportunity to participate in ESL field trips. Former ELL's up to 2 years after testing out, continue to be eligible for ELL testing accommodations and 90 minutes a week of ENL, in addition to any accommodations to their IEP's or 504 plans. By assessing each student, we can determine 2  which accommodations are most suitable and beneficial (will maximize the potential for achievement on all exams) for each ELL at the beginning of the school year. Our ELL's are entitled to using those accommodations for most assessments, including those that are teacher-made and State-mandated. We do not use ELL accommodations on the NYSESLAT. We provide testing accommodations to ELL 's as needed, on all NYS ELA and content area assessments (math, social studies, and science). Accommodations for ELL's are: Time extension, separate location, third reading of listening selection on the ELA, word for word bilingual dictionaries, oral translations for low incidence languages, writing responses in home languages, and simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: ELL's identified as having special needs receive the mandated number of minutes per week of ESL instruction based on their proficiency level and in accordance with the NYS CR Part 154. The Pull Out ESL instruction model is preferred and is used to support their academic needs in reading and writing to enhance the flow of learning within their usual class setting. Out of the three students that have special disabilities, two are escorted with an alternate para when they are serviced by the ESL teacher, Ms.Phipps. The same programs that are utilized for Long Term ELL's are also used with addition to Interactive Smart Board Lessons. Some instructional strategies and grade level materials that the teacher of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and speed English language development are: -Seat students away from any distractions. -Use a checklist to get students organized. -Space short work periods with breaks. -Provide written and verbal directions wih visuals -Provide incentives for beginning and completing material. -Divide tests into small sections - Role Play, model situations -Share success between home and school -Pick a goal and focus on one for each activity. -The Write Source, On Our Way to English, and Rigby In Step Readers are used to acccelarate English language development. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: The IEP, Speech, ESL, Phisical Therapist, and classroom teacher collaborate to make sure there is flexibility in meeting the diverse needs of ELL-SWD's within the least restrictive environment. While doing this we come up with the best strategies for these students during our PPT meetings. All of the service providers are present in the meetings:ESL, speech, IEP Teacher, PT, and OT. During this meeting we ensure that all ELL's with disabilities are receiving services based on their IEP. The members of the PPT team along with classroom teachers compare their timetables on a regular basis to make sure there are no conflicts, and all ELL's receive their mandated hours from each service provider. All of the aforementioned materials and methods for other ELL groups are utilized for students with special needs with additional scaffolding where necessary. Methods used are repeating and rephrasing, using graphic organizers and pictures, and collaborative learning where students have the opportunity to use multiple intelligences and their particular learning styles. Language learning games are supplemental motivational materials. Teachers allow extra "wait time" for students to process information when answering questions. The ELL teacher uses hands on phonics, vocabulary and writing activities. ELL-SWD interact with their peers during instructional time and extra curricular activities. The ESL teacher along with the classroom teachers, have read and understood the IEP of the ESL special education student. They have incorporated the necessary strategies in working with the students. The PPT Team at P.S. 169 meet every two weeks and uses the time to discuss how the ELL's are performing in their mandated services that are listed on their IEP. 3  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The use of two languages is utilized during standardized testing as a test accommodation. Children are allowed to use a bilingual dictionary. If necessary, ELL students have the test available in their native language as well. Also, to help prepare struggling ELL's for the state tests, these students are placed in extended day program which is 2 days a week for 50 minutes each. Explicit English as a Second Language (ESL) and ELA instruction is ongoing to meet the needs of our beginners, intermediate, and advanced students. ELL students will be instructed using the Rigby On Our Way to English, Rigby In Step Readers, and The Write Source. These programs are designed for instruction in listening, speaking, reading, and writing in English specifically for the ELL population. The program is aligned with grade curriculum and the lessons provide differentiated instruction for every lesson. This program complies with the Common Core in ELL instruction. It teaches language using manipulatives, flashcards, audio, and charts to help develop language and build transitions to comfort levels. The point of entry model (POEM) provides a lens through which instruction is planned and implemented to ensure ELL students’ engagement, productivity, assessments and real world connections. The school uses performance indicators set by the state to drive instructional program. We have incorporated variety instructional strategies in accordance with ESL/ELA standards that will allow ELL students to become proficient readers and writers. These strategies include, but are not limited to, role-playing and components of a Balanced Literacy Program including shared reading and writing, interactive writing, guided and independent reading and read-alouds. We use graphic organizers and cooperative learning provides ELL students with an opportunity to engage in accountable talk. Furthermore, ESL instruction utilizes pictures, games, Total Physical Response (TPR), dramatization, text representations, and manipulatives, chants, songs, poems, and charts to help them acquire language skills. ELL students are given an opportunity to operate at all levels of the cognitive domain, striving to reach higher order thinking skills such as: analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. Phonics and vocabulary instruction are provided through various materials to help build language acquisition. Class trips provide the ESL teacher with opportunities for discussion, language experience approach and reinforcement of topics being taught in the classroom. Number sense is developed through engaging in hands on activities. ELL students have multiple opportunities to make connections in science and social studies through literature. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Further implementation of the Common Core State Standards, continued participation in grade meetings by the ELL teacher, lesson planning using more questioning techniques provided by the Depth of Knowledge Levels, and weekly planning sessions are improvements for the upcoming school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There will be programs for ELL's discontinued for the 2015-2016 school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. P.S. 169 had implemented the Renzulli Model for Schoolwide Enrichment for ALL students, including our ELL students. We believe that opportunities to participate in enrichment activities should be provided to all students. We do this through enrichment clusters, community service and various other enrichment activities. All ELL students participate in the activities listed below. All K-5th grade students participate in enrichment clusters once a week for 90 minutes. Enrichment clusters are researched based, flexible, have high standards and advanced levels of academic challenge for all students, employ multiple intelligences, use a hands-on approach and culminate in a product of service. At P.S. 169 we call our enrichment clusters EPI's (Explore, Problem Solve, Investigate). Students choose EPIs based on their interest. The following is a list of some of the EPI's offered at P.S.169: • Crime Scene Investigations 4  • The Recycling Team • Robotics • Buildings - In Collaboration with the Salvadori Institute • Bridges - In Collaboration with the Salvadori Institute • Comic Book Making • Calling All Bankers - In Collaboration with Classroom Inc. • Is There a Doctor in the House? - In Collaboration with Classroom Inc. • The Young Naturalists • Lights, Camera, Action • Wonderful World of Animals • Helping Hands • Treasure Hunting -PS 169 GLEE EPI Community Service • St. Jude’s Math-a-thon • Community Art Contests • Penny Harvest • Food Drives • Senior Citizen Centers • Spring Fling • International Night • School Garden • Student Council • Peer Mediation Additional Enrichment Activities • “Constitution Works” with Teaching Matters • Chess in the Schools Program • Ballroom Dancing from American Ballroom Theatre • CASA Theatre Program with Queens Theatre in the Park • Cultural Trips • Chamber Group • Student Council • Clubs English Language Learners are encouraged to attend Extended Day, After School, and Saturday programs. All communications are sent with native language translations, and bilingual interpretations are used when necessary. ELL students attend regular classroom sponsored field trips as well as ELL field trips. Ballroom Dancing is also offered to the ELL students which is held once a week starting in November 2015 and ending in May 2016. Students study various styles of dance as cultural arts enrichment. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are used to support ELLs at P.S. 169: The ESL teacher uses Rigby's ESL Program: "On Our Way To English", which includes guided reading and shared reading components to help students strengthen their reading and writing skills,. Students use NYSESLAT test prep materials so that they can become familiar with and receive instruction in sample selections from the writing and reading selections of the NYSESLAT. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT AND BEYOND and Empire State NYSESLAT are the two books that are used. -The Write Source: Writing Program -In Step Readers: Guided reading Program 5  -Rosetta Stone computer software program. During independent time students are allowed to log onto their account to practice all 4 Modalities of the English language. • Words Their Way- Big Book are used for shared reading, small books are used for guided reading. Students are introduced to both new vocabulary, and new conversational phrases. This program introduces vocabulary and concepts in English. It also introduces phrases, and encourages the students to converse in English. In addition there is an extensive index of all the vocabulary used in the book. • Mondo – Pathways to Writing - This program assists English Language Learners in develop writing skills on different grade levels. There are fiction and non-fiction posters, as well as large graphic organizers. These help the students develop writing skills using different literary genres. The students learn to plan, compose, record, revise, edit, and publish their writing. • Literature and Leveled Libraries - The ESL classroom has a large collection of literature, organized according to reading levels, themes, genres, and subject matter. ELL students are encouraged to read and borrow books, according to their interest, level, or particular subject being studied in their classrooms. • Bilingual Glossaries - These glossaries in various languages are used in all content areas, in the regular classroom, as well as the ESL classroom. They are also used to prepare for specific citywide tests, such as the State Math Test, or the State Science Test, as well as helping students perform on the actual test. • Leap Frog – An electronic reading program which reads aloud to students as they follow along, using a special pad, book, and pointer. - This is an exciting format for the ELLs on all levels. It encourages and teaches reading in a non-stressful and entertaining atmosphere. It is used in the Extended Day Program and in the Title III After-School. We do not offer a bilingual, dual language or 2-way program at this time; therefore, the only time ELL students are assessed in two languages is when the English LAB-R indicates that the student may be dominant in their native language. At that time, the LAB-R will be administered in the ELL student’s native language. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language Materials and Support: Bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, and bilingual and native language books are used to support students' native language. In our ESL program, newcomer students are paired with bilingual students when necessary. Cognates and cognate word walls are used to scaffold language learning. Pictures and realia are used. Native language support is given to student s by supplying them with bilingual books, in their native language and English. Also, during state tests, bilingual word for word glossaries are supplied to students. We also have staff in the building to provide native language support in the following languages: Italian, Spanish, Hebrew, Hindi, Urdu, Greek, and Korean. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELL services and resources correspond with ELL's ages and grade levels. Grade level materials are utilized in the "Rigby on Our Way to English" program as well as "The Write Source". Other materials such as the games and pictures are age and grade appropriate. ELL teachers use grade level pacing calendars and curriculum maps when planning and consult with classroom teachers . They also refer to the Common Core State Standards when planning. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The following instructional materials are used to support ELLs at P.S. 169: The ESL teacher uses Rigby's ESL Program: "On Our Way To English", which includes guided reading and shared reading components to help students strengthen their reading and writing skills,. Students use NYSESLAT test prep materials so that they can become familiar with and receive instruction in sample selections from the writing and reading selections of the NYSESLAT. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT AND BEYOND and Empire State NYSESLAT are the two books that are used. -The Write Source: Writing Program -In Step Readers: Guided reading Program -Rosetta Stone computer software program. During independent time students are allowed to log onto their account to practice all 4 Modalities of the English language. • Words Their Way- Big Book are used for shared reading, small books are used for guided reading. Students are introduced to both new vocabulary, and new conversational phrases. This program introduces vocabulary and concepts in English. It also introduces phrases, and encourages the students to converse in English. In addition there is an extensive index of all the vocabulary used in the book. 6  • Mondo – Pathways to Writing - This program assists English Language Learners in develop writing skills on different grade levels. There are fiction and non-fiction posters, as well as large graphic organizers. These help the students develop writing skills using different literary genres. The students learn to plan, compose, record, revise, edit, and publish their writing. • Literature and Leveled Libraries - The ESL classroom has a large collection of literature, organized according to reading levels, themes, genres, and subject matter. ELL students are encouraged to read and borrow books, according to their interest, level, or particular subject being studied in their classrooms. • Bilingual Glossaries - These glossaries in various languages are used in all content areas, in the regular classroom, as well as the ESL classroom. They are also used to prepare for specific citywide tests, such as the State Math Test, or the State Science Test, as well as helping students perform on the actual test. • Leap Frog – An electronic reading program which reads aloud to students as they follow along, using a special pad, book, and pointer. - This is an exciting format for the ELLs on all levels. It encourages and teaches reading in a non-stressful and entertaining atmosphere. It is used in the Extended Day Program and in the Title III After-School. We do not offer a bilingual, dual language or 2-way program at this time; therefore, the only time ELL students are assessed in two languages is when the English LAB-R indicates that the student may be dominant in their native language. At that time, the LAB-R will be administered in the ELL student’s native language. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P.S. 169 does not have any activities in place before the beginning of the school year to assist newly enrolled students; however P.S169 does have several activities to assist ELL's at the start of the school year and during the school year. These include parent orientation breakfasts, open school night, and the pairing of newcomers with bilingual students to assist them. In addition, the school provide numerous activities that involves students and parents such as: Hat Making Workshop coordinated by the art teacher Mrs. Kaufman, bake sales, The Pumpkin Parade, Boo Bash, Math Game Night in January, Valentines Day activities in January, Open Mike Night at Barns and Noble, Burger King Night, The Bay Terrace School Carnival, and parent meetings to help parents work with their children on test preperation for the ELA and Math. Paste response to question here: 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? There are no language electives that are offered to ELL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The staff at PS 169 receive their professional development from Columbia University Teachers College. Sample tile of workshops include :"Supporting non-fiction Reading , Vocabulary and Talk through powerful mini-lessons and Read alouds" "What you need to know about teaching foundational Skills in Reading and Writing" "Strengthening Relationships and Teaching Primary ICT Classrooms:Maximizing Your Co-teaching Situation to it's Fullest." 7  ELL, regular and special education teachers will be provided with professional development on the various strategies that are effective when teaching ELL students. ESL professional development workshops Ms.Phipps will attend are: -"Vocabulary Unpacked" 10/29/15 -"Learn from a National Think Tank on Supporting ELL's in Reading and Writing Unitrs of study" Teachers College Columbia University. -Text Complexity" 11/24/15 -"SIFE" 12/17/15 -"Disciplinary Literacy 1/21/16 -"Language Acquisition/Language Disability" 2/24/16 -"RTI for ELL's" 3/17/16 -Oral Language Unpacked" 4/20/16 -TBA 5/26/16 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ESL teacher work with classroom teachers to help students develop skills they will need in middle school such as note taking techniques, listening skills, filling out graphic organizers and following multi-step directions. The guidance counselor, Yang Synn, holds a meeting with parents to talk about kids going from elementary school into middle school. The guidance counselor attends workshops on social and emotional development of the students. The ESL and classroom teachers provide direct instruction in content area vocabulary and materials and use data to analyze students' strengths and weaknesses on standardized tests. Students visit local middle schools as well. Instruction is rigorous in preparation for the middle school grades. Item analysis is utilized in lesson planning in order to address student needs. In the general ed classrooms, students sit together on round tables, rather than the traditional square desks. The students store their books underneath chairs. During IIM, students work with other teachers on the grade. These strategies help the ELL students transition from classroom to classroom, which is done in middle school daily. The following professional development sessions have taken place or are planned for all teachers of ELLs including our ESL teacher and classroom teachers who service ELLs. These professional development sessions will serve to fulfill the mandated training required. These professional development opportunities will be taking place during Chancellor’s Conference Days and monthly faculty conferences. • Using Data to Drive Instruction • Differentiation • Guided Reading • Schoolwide Enrichment Model • Independent Investigation Method The ELL Teacher also meets with the classroom teachers individually and disscuss strategies for each ELL. There is a sign in sheet and an agenda that is provided along with PD materials. These documents are stored in a binder in the ELL office. The following professional development sessions have taken place or are planned for all teachers of ELLs including our ESL teacher and classroom teachers who service ELLs. These professional development sessions will serve to fulfill the 7.5 hour mandated training required. These professional development opportunities will be taking place during Chancellor’s Conference Days and monthly faculty conferences. • Using Data to Drive Instruction • Differentiation • Guided Reading 8  • Schoolwide Enrichment Model • Independent Investigation Method The ELL Teacher also meets with the classroom teachers individually and disscuss strategies for each ELL. There is a sign in sheet and an agenda that is provided along with PD materials. These documents are stored in a binder in the ELL office. A minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition , including a focus on the best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL's. For ENL and bilingual teachers 50% of their PD time is towards language acquisition and content area instruction. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ESL teacher meets individually with parents of ELL's at least once a year, in addition to parent teacher conferences and initial parent orientations. This meeting is to discuss the goals of the program, the child's language development progress, English language assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting includes the necessary staff to inform th parents about their child's language development. The meeting is conducted with a translator in the language of the parents preferred language. Attendance is recorded using existing procedures. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The staff at P.S. 169 will continue to support parents of ELL students and offer counseling on a daily basis. ELL parents are invited to be part of the Parents Association. Parent workshops are offered for all parents with interpreters to support the monolingual parent. All school family activities are designed to include all parents of the P.S. 169 community. ELL parents will participate in literacy and numeracy workshops that are provided for the entire school. • PTA Meetings - All parents are invited to monthly PTA meeting. Translators are available, making these workshops welcoming for ELL parents. • Parent Workshops - All parents are invited to monthly parent workshops. These workshops are curriculum based. Translators are available, making these workshops welcoming for ELL parents. A bilingual parent workshop is conducted to explain the NYSESLAT. The Parent Coordinator distributes study guides and various materials for use at home in English and their native language. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Vanessa Rosa, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 169 - Bay Terrace School School DBN: 25Q169 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Vanessa Rosa Leah Murray Orit Foresta Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Joycelyn Phipps ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jenn Sharif Parent Stephanie Garcia/Model Teacher Christina Kaidas/ENL Support Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Yang Synn School Counselor Danielle DiMango Ying Ying (Jenny) An N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 06/30/17 Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 N/A N/A 06/30/17 06/30/17 N/A N/A N/A 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q169 School Name: The Bay Terrace School Superintendent: DiMango The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 169 ACCESSES ALL INFORMATION BASED ON ATS REPORTS, EMERGENCY CONTACT CARDS, HOME LANGUAGE SURVEY Every year a data report is created that is updated regularly with the languages that parents speak, by class and grade. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language THE PARENTS PREFERRED LANGUAGES FOR BOTH WRITTEN & ORAL COMMUNICATION ARE ENGLISH, SPANISH, CHINESE , and Korean. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. TO COMMUNICATE WITH ELL PARENTS WE USE SCHOOL MESSENGER TRANSLATED IN THEIR LANGUAGE, FLYERS WITH TRANSLATION, TESTING MATERIALS ARE ORDERED IN THE PREFERRED LANGUAGE, FAMILY HANDBOOK, AND SCHOOL LETTERS. Family handbooks are distibuted at the beginning of the school year. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 3  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? FOR THE PARENT TEACHER CONFERENCES HELD IN NOVEMBER AND MARCH AND THE TWO CURRICULUM NIGHTS HELD IN SEPTEMBER AND JUNE, AND OUR EVERY TUESDAY DURING PARENT TEACHER TIME OUR ELL TEACHER MS. PHIPPS HAS PARENT APPOINTMENTS TO SPEAK WITH INDIVIDUAL PARENTS REGARDING ACADEMIC PROGRESS OF THE STUDENTS. THE GUIDANCE COUNSELOR ALSO HOLDS INDIVIDUAL MEETINGS WITH PARENTS.September 21, 2015 was curriculum night, November 5, 2015 was the Fall PTC conference, March 10, 2016 is the date for the Spring PTC, and June 8 th will be the Spring curriculum night. Two weeks ahead of time, documents are sent to the Translation Unit for language translation of documents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will use welcome poster and place it at the entrance of the building upon the arrival of parents. The Parents' Bill of Rights , Parents Guide to Language Access are given to parents. The Language ID Guide is placed at the security desk and in the main office, 4  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PARENTS FILL OUT THE SURVEY IN MARCH AND SURVEYS DISTRIBUTED FOLLOWING A WORKSHOP. A focus group is created with a mixture of parents from different cultures. This group will gather feedback and best practices from others parents in the community on how well we do as a school. 5 
