 27Q223 School Name: P.S. 223 LYNDON B. JOHNSON Principal: DEBORAH OTTO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Lyndon B. Johnson 342700010223 3K – 5 School Number (DBN): 27Q223 125-20 Sutphin Blvd Jamaica , New York 11434 (718) 558-2900 Phone Number: (718) 925-9020 Fax: Nicole Kelly Nkelly@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Deborah Otto Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Sandra Wilks-Duplan NatanyahScott Sandra Wilks-Duplan SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Michelle Henry N/A N/A Keisha Sterling District Information Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: JenniferAmbert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd Ozone Park, New York 11416 jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 642-5800 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   94QFSS FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing, NY 11354 mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-281-3259 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Deborah Otto Sandra Wilks-Duplan NatanyahScott Denise Brown Vera Hartofilis Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Teacher Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nanette Ezenekwe Teacher Michelle Henry JeliciaHuriston CayonDennis JosanneBalroop Shirlet Predvil Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview “If you want to go fast, go alone. If you want to go far, go together ” – African Proverb Our Educational Philosophy : The staff, parent's and the entire school community believe deeply in the power of professional learning communities as a catalyst for ongoing change, improvement and innovation in education; as   such, we believe it is incumbent on all of us in the field of education to be professionals, to be learners, and to work as members of communities or teams. We believe the powerful collaboration that characterizes professional learning communities is a systematic process in which teachers work together to analyze and improve their classroom practice. Teachers work in teams, engaging in an ongoing cycle of inquiry that promotes deep team learning. This process in turn, leads to higher levels of student achievement. Our Mission Statement: P.S.223 is a professional learning community with the mission of collaborating for the academic, emotional, and social growth of each student through quality and purposeful educational experiences in and out of the classroom. Our school and community will share in the responsibilities of nurturing students along the path to thrive as productive life-long learners in a culturally rich world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Lyndon Baines Johnson Elementary School P.S. 223Q is a three-story barrier free school built in 1974, serving full 3-K through fifth grade students. The building is partially air-conditioned, including most of the first floor and the library. The school has two schoolyards, one of which is a fully functional playground, appropriate for grades 3k-2. The second schoolyard is large paved area, equipped with basketball courts and tennis courts. This yard serves as the main play/recreational area and is used for morning line-up and recess. P.S. 223Q houses a Jamaica Hospital School Health Program that is funded through the New York State School-based Health Center Program. This program includes a full time nurse and social worker, as well as a doctor on site several days a week. This grant provides medical services to students throughout southeast Queens. This program provides regular check-ups and on time immunizations for students. It has a tremendous impact on the health and well being of the students, many of whom would be unable to afford these services otherwise. The school currently houses three (3) 3K classes, two (2) Pre-kindergarten classes (One general Education Class and one Inclusion Class), six(6) Kindergarten classes (One 12:1:1 grade k//1 bridge, One 12:1:1 bilingual and four General Education Classes), four (4) First Grade Classes (One 12:1:1 grade 1/2 bridge and three General Education Classes), three(3) Second Grade Classes , four (4) Third Grade Classes (three General Education Classes and one 12:1:1 Class ), four (4) Fourth Grade Classes (four General Education Classes and one 12:1:1 Class), and five (5) Fifth Grade Classes( 3 General Education, One ICT class and One 12:1 class). At the present time, our staff consists of one (1) Principal, two (2) assistant principals, thirty-three (33) classroom teachers and seven (7) cluster teachers, one (1) SETSS teacher, one (1) IEP teacher, one (1) ENL teacher, 2.5 speech teachers, 1.5 Occupational Therapist, 1 Physical Therapist, a full-time guidance counselor, social worker, school psychologist, two (2) secretaries, two (2) school safety officers, 16 paraprofessionals and 4 school aides. Our teachers have implemented the New York City curriculum for ELA & Math. We are completing our fourth year using Go Math and our second full school year implementation of Teachers College Writers Workshop Model & a collaboration of Balanced Literacy, ReadyGen and Fundations. We adopted this model after looking closely at our data and through our team meetings. We have discovered that our students needed more support to meet the Learning Standards. In addition, grades three-five, we will incorporate test strategies and reading skills weekly. Our focus will be on the guided reading portion of the block to ensure we are meeting the needs of all students. This is also our second year Departmentalizing in grade 5 for ELA/Humanities and Math/Science. This model allowed our teachers to focus on two subject areas and have greater ability to differentiate their instruction to meet the needs of all learners. Students benefited by gaining stronger interpersonal skills by being exposed to different teaching styles. During math, we use the workshop model as well. This model includes homework review, problem of the day, mini lesson, guided practice, group work, re-teach in guided math groups, tiered center activities based on students 0  abilities, recap and exit slips. During guided groups, teachers focus on the mini lesson and work on the skills as well as to enhance student engagement with problem solving skills using the DOK. Through Academic Intervention Services, we support children in need of differentiated instruction. Our AIS teachers use various methods including one to one services and small group instruction. AIS services are offered to our students in all curriculum areas depending on need, based on data from baseline assessments embedded in our programs, which include Fountas & Pinnell intervention kits and iReady consumables. Our AIS teachers focus on Reading, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies. AIS services are offered as a part of our Literacy Program. Hands on activities offered by our Science cluster and mapping activities offered by our Social Studies cluster. Grade level teachers meet weekly, Instructional Team convenes monthly and Inquiry Team congregates bi-monthly to investigate instructional/educational trends of our students. Technology and data are abundant at PS 223Q. Every classroom from Pre-K to the fifth grade is equipped with various forms of technology: laptops, I-pads, Desktops, Nooks, ELMOS and either a Smart board or Promethean board. We have been awarded a RESO-A Grant in 2018-2019. which we plan to replenish or replace existing laptops. Teachers utilize the vast forms of technology within their classroom or media center to analyze and share data. The teachers are able to electronically analyze trends of their grade or of the school to gear programs to lead to effective activities. We use Skedula to inform parents about particulars such as important notices, grades and messages. Our school continues to implement CORE- our Positive Behavior modification program, which includes sections of Sanford-Harmony, Leader In Me and PBIS. At the beginning of the year, Staff reviews core values and helps to include all stakeholders in the execution of CORE, which is to be safe, responsible, respectful and prepared. We use Class Dojo as a tool to reinforce our reward system and keep parents updated with their child's behavior. This helps us to promote positive behavior and ensure that students follow the core values of our school. Monthly, the students can spend their Dojo Points at the DOJO Store where they can purchase tangible incentives. The team also created monthly pillars based on specific character traits. The traits are taught to the students during SEL (Social /Emotional) morning meeting and during Character Education. Students are selected to participate in this program on a needs basis for our SEL grant- Child Mind Institute program through a referral from CIT, SBST, PPT, Teacher recommendation and Parent concern. Adopt-an-Adult is a student/teacher partnership that allows teachers to build with relationships with targeted students based on academic and SEL needs. We have established excellent partnerships with community-based organizations. Our relationship with The Department of Youth and Community Development has provided us with an after school program called Compass. This program allows 180 students in grades K-5 to attend a free after-school program that offers the children various opportunities from homework help to arts and crafts and various clubs. We also recognize that our community struggles with personal resources, especially during the holidays. In collaboration with our PTA, Student Government and Staff, we conduct several charitable events which includes a Breast Cancer Walk, Friendship Grams, Turkey Trot, Diabetes Walk, Food Drive, Winter Accessories Drive, Breakfast with Santa, Bring Your Dad to School, Mother's Day Tea and Thanksgiving Feasts to help promote and strengthen our home/school connection. We also look to encourage healthy food choices both in and out of school. We are now piloting the Cook Shop Workshop to assist with food choices. Selected students and their families are invited to learn how to read labels, shop smartly/healthily and make good choices in food choice and preparation. We recognize how critical parents’ roles are in the lives of their children. We have increased the amount of parent workshops being offered at our school. Using surveys and other means of communication, we have provided targeted workshops on various topics and times requested by parents in order to increase the number of participants. By providing more opportunities for parents to attend a diverse amount of workshops, we anticipate a strong partnership with the community and this will ensure the best possible educational experience for students and parents alike. 1  With the implementation of Teachers College Writing Program, our parent involvement in student/school activities has increased through the celebration of grade-wide Publishing Parties. Parent Initiatives: PTA input... 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a small population of ENL students, (31) students, from different cultures that are serviced through our ENL program by a licensed ENL teacher. Through the use of technology, we expose the students to English to help with the acquisition of the language. We use Escalate>English materials, in addition to other CCLS related materials to support their learning of the curriculum. Our ENL Teacher also provides Professional Development to teachers in need of extra support and continually collaborates with staff to ensure academic and social success for all ENL Learners. In addition, 22% of our population is Students with Disabilities. Based on our school performance, our students with disabilities are performing better than our compared group both in ELA & Math. We are less than .10% in meeting the city percent. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2017/2018 school year, we have shown progress under the element of Rigorous Instruction of the Framework for Great Schools. According to teacher observations and the Danielson Framework, teachers have demonstrated an increase in asking Higher Level thought-provoking questions to the students. Our Key areas of focus this year are:  Deepen school-wide instructional practices through the strategic facilitation of professional learning and feedback  Maintaining a positive school culture using Sanford Harmony to promote positive behavior and active listening school wide 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q223 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 559 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 47 47 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 55 51 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 85.7% % Reduced Lunch 5.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 8.1% 15.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.1 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 81% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 26 26 92.2% 7.3% 21.1% 61.0% 13.6% 9.5% 4 5% 7.1 30.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. This year we have demonstrated areas of strength under the element of Rigorous Instruction. As noted in our last Principals Review, Teachers have access to curricula that align to the expectations of the CCLS. We have adopted Teacher's College Writing and Go Math to support the alignment to the CCLS and the integration of the instructional shifts. Teachers also have regular opportunities to engage in curriculum mapping and weekly areas of focus based on the most current trend data. 2. Based on this years 2017/2018 Quality Review, we see that the priority needs that still have to be addressed is aligning assessments to the curricula, using on-going assessments/grading practices, and analyzing information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have a minimum of 10% growth in Go Math Beginning of the year to the End of the year assessments in grades K-2. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Give professional development to staff on incorporating tiered problem solving strategies throughout all math lessons, centers, and tasks  Revise curriculum maps to reflect more check ins and monitoring of skills needed for mastery of each unit.  - Students - Teachers *Six week cycle focusing - Administrators - Lead Teachers - Parents on Math during Monday PD *September 2018 to revise curriculum maps *Six week cycle focusing on math during Monday's *Monthly , minimum of two PD's offered to parents on Tuesday's - Professional Development Team -Teachers - Administrators - Special Ed. Teachers - Professional Development Team - AIS Providers - ENL Teachers - SETTS Teachers  All special education teachers, AIS and SETTS providers -SWD  and ENL Teachers will receive targeted Professional Development to address this area of concern Small group instruction will focus more heavily on the use of problem solving and multi step problems related to the real world in their lesson planning  Parental support/ workshops -Special Education Teachers, AIS Providers, ENL Teachers SETTS Providers, Parents of SWD 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In coordination with the PTA, the Parent Coordinator and Teachers will survey parents on ways they would like the school to support them at home, and offer a multitude of ways rigorous instruction can be carried over to the home environment. We will provide targeted parent workshops (based on surveys) such as Homework support workshop, 5  State Test Prep workshop, technology workshop; Teacher Tuesdays; provide user names/passwords for school based instructional websites (Think Central, MyON ) to assist parents with helping their children in the home setting.  Key Personnel include: Administration, Parent Coordinator, PTA, and Teachers  Timeline: September 2018 Homework Support, Technology Workshop; Administered in the months of December 2018 and March 2019 State Test Prep; May 2019 Technology Workshop Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development Grab & Go Kits, Smartboards, Think Central - tiered activities, laptops & i-pads, teacher meetings, Instructional Team Meetings, teacher per-session for after school program and Saturday Academy and Lunch and Learn and Parent Workshops, Support Parent use of: NYSEDREGENTS.ORG, Amplified Science, Fountas and Finnell, AIS w/ Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 5% of students in grades Kindergarten- Second will have demonstrated growth in Go Math as measured by the Middle of the Year Go Math Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Beginning and Middle of the year Go Math Assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. According to the our latest data provided by our Frame Work for Great Schools Report for 2017-2018 under the framework element of Supportive Environment , our school exhibits areas of strength when it comes to creating a safe and supportive classroom environment. Another strength is our staff shares and expresses to the students the belief that all students can achieve high academic success. In the area of Supportive Environment we recognize there are priority needs as per our Quality Review data from 2017-2018 school year. The most significant data trends show that we need to address and support the staff when it comes to poor student behavior and following directions/rules in the classroom. 2. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all classrooms will use Sanford Harmony as a tool to promote positive behavior and reinforce/reward active listening in the classroom as measured by student attendance during our themed monthly celebrations/activities, Classroom DOJO App and teacher/parent interactions. In order to measure the success of Sanford Harmony, we will collect surveys three times a year from parents and teachers; examine OORS reports compared to previous years and monitor and track attendance growth at school functions. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Activities / Strategies:  PBIS Professional Development   Sanford Harmony Professional Development Implement School-wide Dojo Points reward system & use of the Classroom DOJO App Sanford Harmony Curriculum/Class Activities   DOJO Store  Parent Workshops on Sanford Harmony   Parental Workshops targeted for SWD  Professional Develpment for Special Education Teachers, ENL Teachers, AIS/SETTS Service Providers SWD represented on Sanford Harmony Committees  Parents of SWD, SWD, Special Education Teachers, All Service Providers Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Staff, students, parents *PD for PBIS Sept. 2018/Jan.2019 Administration, Lead Teachers, PBIS Committee, Sanford Harmony Student Committee Administration, Lead Teachers, Special Education Teachers, ENL Teachers, SETTS/AIS Providers, PBIS Committee, Sanford Harmony- Student Committee * Weekly classroom activities during morning meetings *Monthly shopping at DOJO store for every class * Minimum two monthly Parent workshops * September 2018/January 2019/May 2019 Parent Workshops (3 minimum) * PD Mondays: Minimum 1 per month for September, November 2018/January, March, May 2019 8  * Student Council Meetings every other month with SWD representation 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through the use of the DOJO APP, parents can have a real-time communication with teachers regarding not only academic updates but behavioral updates as well. Parents will be instantly notified when points are rewarded or taken away from students. Parents will be given multiple opportunities to meet with teachers or support staff to upload the app and join their child's class Dojo group. During parent workshops, Teacher Tuesdays or PTA meetings, we can model and train parents to use this tool to reinforce our schools vision of positive behavior.  Key Personnel Responsible: Administration, Technology Teacher, Classroom Teachers, PTA, Parent Coordinator  Timeline: Monthly Parent Workshops, Tuesday Afternoons Parent/Teacher Visitations, Surveys Collected (minimum) September 2018, January 2019, and May 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development for teachers and parents, Grab and Go Kits for Math, Smartboards, ThinkCentral-tiered math activities, laptops & I-pads, teacher meetings, Instructional Team Meetings, teacher per-session for after school program and Saturday Academy, Lunch and Learn, Parent Workshops, Support Parent use of : NYSEDREGENTS.ORG - Math, Reading and Science, Amplified Science, Fountas and Pinnell, AIS w/ F and P. DOJO School Store, Class DOJO Online System, Sanford Harmony Core Curriculum and Classroom Activities/Unit Plans, Parent Workshops, Teacher Tuesdays, PBIS / Sanford Harmony Committee Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 9  By February 2019, 80% of our classrooms will fully implement Sanford Harmony as part of their daily curriculum to promote positive behavior and reinforce/reward active listening in the classroom. An increase in student attendance at our monthly themed celebrations will be used to measure its success Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Enrollment on Class DOJO, Class participation and accumulation of DOJO points, execution of Stanford Harmony culminating projects/activities reflected in the classroom, decrease in behavioral referrals/administration disciplinary action. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. For this framework element, our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide supports the idea that we maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. Teachers are engaged in professional collaborations by meeting in grade and vertical teams. 2. The area under this element that needs to be addressed is surveying our staff and providing targeted professional development based on needs and putting systems and structures in place to allow all teachers the opportunity to work as a professional learning communities where they can collaborate with their peers to promote teacher best practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have completed a minimum of 3 Classroom Inter-Visitations, with visiting teachers choosing an area of focus that can be seen and implemented in the classroom to improve student learning and increase teachers best practices. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Provide outside qualified personel/facilitators to  conduct Professional Development Schedule inter visitations monthly for staff to see best practices within our school building General education teachers *Monday PDs for all staff for the 2018/2019  Collaborate with other elementary schools for school year class inter-visitations  Provide opportunities for staff to attend training and workshops outside of school for writers workshop, go math, PBIS, Stanford Harmony and other initiatives that help foster our schools vision  Provide differentiated Professional Development for staff working with SWD  Visit/collaborate with other schools/classes  Send out of building for training and workshops Teachers working with SWD, ENL Teachers, SETTS Providers, AIS Providers * Teachers Choice of Prep Period (minimum 3) *October/November 2018, January/February 2019,May/June 2019 * September 2018 SWD PD and monthly support during Mondays PD *Ongoing rotations of outside PD October/November 2018, January/February 2019,May/June 2019 - Administration - Professional Development Committee - Administration - Professional Development Committee 2  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to support and engage families, Teachers will turn-key and model strategies obtained from their Professional Development that will help support children both in and out of school. Timeline: September 201-June 2019 Key Personnel: All staff Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PTA Meetings, Teacher Tuesdays, Parent Workshops, Professional Development outside of school, Professional Development in school by Go Math, Teachers College, Sanford Harmony, Per Diem Teacher Coverage Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of the staff will have participated in at least 2 classroom inter-visitations with an identified area of focus that can be visible by school leaders through classroom observations and pre/post observation conferences Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Class Inter-Visitation forms, Observations, Post-Observation Conferences, Teacher Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. As per our 2017/2018 Quality Review findings, feedback to teachers cites strengths and challenges and next steps that are aligned to the schools instructional focus. School leaders use metrics from Advance to design professional development. 2. A priority need outlined from our Quality Review this year under the element of effective school leadership is to ensure school leaders provide clear next steps to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have been provided with a minimum of 2 or 4 (MOTP Observation Options Form) pre and post observations conferences with feedback and support in targeted areas of focus (4.1) and clear next steps will be provided to promote improved pedagogical practices from developing to effective/highly effective ratings. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will meet with every teacher at the beginning of the school year individually to set goals and review previous year's performance pertaining to the areas to focus on for the upcoming school year. Design a TIP and work closely with teachers who were rated developing overall. Provide them with a mentor teacher to meet with weekly to increase quality instruction. Set up inter-visitations for teachers who are rated developing in questioning and discussion. Provide professional development for teachers on strategies on questioning with specific emphasis on strategies to address varied needs of ELLs and SWDs,. Use of Videos and PD from Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach. Other strategies include: - increase teacher collaboration - increase teacher-family collaboration - PD on DOK, Differentiated Instruction,use of data to inform instruction, and effective lesson planning that supports the needs of individual learners. Administrators will observe teachers at least four times and provide targeted feedback around element 3B to the staff and teachers will work and collaborate as a Professional Learning Community. Teachers September/October 2018 Administration Developing Teachers September/October 2018 Teachers and Administration Teachers rated developing on 4.1 Teachers SWDs ELLs October 2018, December 2108, February 2019, April 2019 Administration and Highly effective. Effective teachers * Mondays Teacher Professional Development Administration, Teachers, Mentors * Fall 2018/Spring 2019 * Minimum 2 Fall Visits 2018/Minimum 2 Spring 2019 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent involvement and workshops dedicated to helping parents support their children at home using higher level questioning during FRED, and skills strategies to promote smart talk at home. Key Personnel- Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administrators Timeline- September 2018, January 2019, May 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Danielson Framework for Teaching, Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach, District Professional Learning, Inter-visitations to other schools/classes with per-session as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administrators will have observed all teachers and provide timely feedback which will result in at least 35% of teachers showing improvements in 4.1 on the Quality Review Rubric which relates to Domain 1 & 3 ratings of the Danielson Framework. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching, Pre/Post Observation Conferencing, Lesson Plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Approximately 5% of parents regularly attend Parent Association meetings as per our attendance records from the 2017/2018 school year. Based on data from parent surveys from the previous school year, there is a need for more activities that promote parent involvement. We realize the critical role parents play in the lives of their children and to support this parent-child relationship, we will offer more workshops and events of high interest for the parents to attend. To strengthen the home-school connection, we will regularly update our school-wide website so that parents can easily access all pertinent information related to the school. A priority need is to promote parent involvement by providing workshops and activities of high interest and importance to the school community. During the months of September and October of 2018, we will conduct surveys to collect data on specific areas parents show interest in. Our 2018/2019 parent workshops and activities will be modified to meet parent needs such as time, day and areas of interest. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent involvement will increase by at least 10% as indicated by the attendance at Parent Teachers Association meetings, workshops provided by the school, school events and Tuesday conferences with teachers.This will be measured by Attendance sheets for all in school events (PTC, PTA, TC Publishing Parties, Assemblies);phone call logs for Teacher Tuesdays 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). On-going workshops in areas determined by the needs and interest of all parents with specific meetings focused on Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. Strategies include: - the development of trusting, collaborative relationships and two way communication among teachers, families, and community members; - the recognition, respect, and commitment to addressing families’ needs, while bridging cultural differences; - the adherence to a philosophy of partnership where power and responsibility are shared and families are seen as effective advocates for their children - parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included in decision-making on the education of their child Parents of all students 3K - grade 5, SWDs and ELLs * Monthly PTA Meetings * 3 Parent Teacher Conferences * School Celebrations (Writing, Holidays, Book Clubs) * Montly SLT Meetings Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administration The following parent activities will be provided throughout the school year: All 3K-5 parents *September/October/November ● Parent Lending Library ● Coffee and Conversation with the Principal ● Family Fun Night 2018-Fall parent activities and Workshops scheduled * December 2018 Holiday Activities * February/March 2019- State Test Prep Workshops, SWD, ENL, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administration 8 and other parent support workshops * April-June 2019- Spring Activities, Concerts, Moving Up Ceremonies, Attendance Celebrations, Student of the Month school year celebrations ● Family Movie Night ● Terrific Tuesday ● Art Workshops ● Technology Workshops ● Open School Week ● English Language Arts, Math and Science Test Preparation workshops ● Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports ● Workshops for parents of ELLS ● Mother’s Day Tea ● Donuts with Daddy - Chorus Performances - Student of the month celebrations - Perfect attendance dances Parent Surveys to assess the needs of the of parents All 3K-5 parents * Minimum 3 per year (Fall 2018, January 2019 and May 2019) Parent Coordinator Strategies to promote stronger and positive family ties: All 3K-5 parents * Back to School Night/Fall Festival September 2018  Be sure the first contact with parents is *Teacher Tuesdays Parent Coordinator, Teachers. Principal, a positive one.  Communicate with parents straightforwardly and simply, avoiding educational "jargon."  Ensure that all parents have regular access to clear, concise, and easily readable information about their children's school and classroom.  Ask parents to share their concerns and opinions about school, and then address those concerns.  Accommodate parents' work schedules.  Accommodate language and cultural differences  Regular communication with parents through online "Class DOJO" program, *Class Dojo Workshops October/November 2018 Assistant Principals *ENL parent support workshop November 2018 * ENL parent workshop January 2019 *ENL/SWD Parent workshop Spring 2019 9 school messenger and the school website 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. After school compass program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School messenger, "Class DOJO", School website, Parent Teacher Association, Parent Coordinator workshops, Tuesday teacher meetings with parents, Teacher per session, instructional resources, teacher per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Parent involvement will increase by 5% as indicated by attendance at workshops, teacher meetings , Parent Teacher Association meetings and school events as compared to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets from workshops, teacher meetings, school events and PTA meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Direct Instruction During NYSELAScores guided instruction, school day After school Saturday program Teacher Recommendations F&P levels modeling through workshop model Writing Performance Tasks Formative and Summative Assessments Scaffolding and different entry points for students based on needs assessment Materials Used: Teachers College Writing Program I-ready On-line Resources Read, write think.org; 1  Mathematics NYS Math Scores Starfall; Readworks Supporting the Standard Time For Kids Magazine National Geographic: Ladders (leveled non fiction books) Direct instruction, guided instruction modeling through workshop model Teacher Recommendations Direct Instruction During school day Small Group After school Go Math Performance Tasks Scaffolding and different entry points for students based on needs assessment Pull-out Push-in Formative and Summative Assessments Materials Used: Go Math Saturday program 2  Science Science Tests scores Teacher Recommendations I-ready diagnostic program & instruction program on-line resources: Think central; k-5 math teaching resources.com; cool math; math is fun Curriculum Associates materials Direct instruction, guided instruction, modeling through workshop model Scaffolding and different entry points for students based on needs assessment Social Studies Performance Tasks Formative and Summative Assessments Social Studies performance tasks Direct instruction, guided instruction, modeling through workshop mode Teacher recommendation Scaffolding and different entry points for students based on needs assessment Formative and Summative Assessments Small Group During the school day After school program Small Group During the school day 3  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher recommendations Understanding self, developing Positive Self-Esteem Whole class During school day PPT Meetings Problem-solving skills Small group Anger Management one-to-one delivery OORS incident reports character Education Teacher Anecdotals Minor behavior forms 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 17 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Basic emergency supplies for school such as: book bags, books, notebooks, uniforms. In addition, we will provide other educational services which may include counseling and academic intervention so that students have an opportunity to progress academically, Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Administrative staff hires teachers through Open Market or NYC hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly-qualified teachers. The secretary will work closely with the HR point to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines Mentors are assigned to support new teachers in their first and second year. Professional development is on-going throughout the school year in specific areas of need based on the individual teachers.. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teacher Evaluation system and Danielson rubric Differentiated Monday Professional Development Analyzing student work & work protocol Writing Workshop & The Writing Process 7  Professional development on the Common Core instructional shifts Implementation of Go Math and TC writers' program Analyzing Data and support by the Data Specialist. Mid year reflections & End of year reflections Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). To ensure that our children have a smooth transition from pre-kindergarten into kindergarten, our pre-kindergarten team provides an environment that meets the social and emotional needs of the children through strong teacher collaboration and parental involvement. Our pre-kindergarten teachers work collaboratively. Each week during inquiry they have an opportunity to develop their units of study, look at student work and create different types of assessments that are used to monitor students’ growth. All lessons taught within the unit of study are aligned with the New York State Pre-kindergarten Foundation for the Common Core. The school provides an orientation meeting for parents of pre-school students entering the elementary school program. Information packets and support are also provided for parents that include tips and techniques for parents to use at home to support literacy. 8  Families have opportunities to meet administrators, teachers and support staff before students enter kindergarten. To encourage parental involvement, various activities are sent home to give families the opportunity to work together on meaningful activities. In addition, parents are encouraged to take out books from the library. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers and administrators meet to discuss the assessment options provided to them from Go Math and the DOE assessment options and use the data to make adjustments to our instructional program. We have chosen a variety of assessments including standardized tests, i-Ready as well as rubric based performance tasks in order to match CCLS assessment standards. In addition, the i-ready diagnostic tool provides weekly reports on student progress to evaluate effectiveness of small group instruction and AIS provided to address students' needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a,5b,5c,5d,5e,6 ,7 5a, 5b,5c,5d,5e,.6.7 5a,5b,5c,d,e.6.7 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 324,908.00 155,732.00 0 0 3,495,836.00 X X x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 9  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P,S, 223 Lyndon. B. Johnson, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P.S223Q will support parents and families of Title I students by:  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children;  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The 1  school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 2  ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 223Q , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 3  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 4  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 5  ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 1 1 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Title III program previously offered at PS 223Q was highly beneficial to the ENL students. The reading and math scores all point to the importance of this supplemental service, and its continuation will help sustain and strengthen the positive trend in the students’ performance. Due to the joint efforts of the school staff and administrators, the ENL's in general performed within the expectations on the New York State standardized tests in the previous years. Therefore there is sufficient reason to keep the program open this year. With Title III fund granted , about 15 ENL's from grades three through five will participate in the hour and half After School Program. The Program hours will be 2:30- 4:00 PM. The program will last about 12 weeks, totaling 24 sessions. It will begin March 6th and run until May 30th. An ENL-certified teacher will teach the program. The program instruction will focus on reading and math, using ENL methodologies. Students will work in small groups, preparing for the NYS ELA and math tests. The teacher will use test data to plan instruction and work for the students. Selected materials in ENL, reading, math, science, and social studies will all be used. In addition, multi-media and on-line applications will be included, such as Go math and I-Ready which covers reading, math, science and social studies, aligned with CCLS. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Title III program recognizes the need to provide staff development for the teachers involved with ENL's. The changing educational environment poses big challenges not only for the new teachers but also for everyone else involved with the children. Training teachers provides key support for the efforts toward success. Personnel involved in professional development will include Geeta Persad, ENL teacher. Workshops will cover a variety of topics such as laws and regulations, instructional approaches and strategies, books and materials, cultural awareness, and parent involvement. A tentative calendar of workshops is provided as below, 8  Part C: Professional Development • September and October: regulations and mandates regarding the bilingual/ENL program, parental involvement, cultural awareness, HLIS and LAB-R, getting ready for the new-comers. • November and December: second language acquisition, the State Learning Standards and test policies, ENL methodologies and materials, Supporting the ENL student in the classroom, Multiple entry points. • January and February: differentiated instruction for the ENL's, teaching reading to newcomers, challenges in learning to read and to write, technologies in the classroom. • March and April: Helping ENL's in the content areas, teaching math concepts and vocabulary, teaching math to newcomers and students in needs(differentiated planning and instruction) • May and June: NYSESLAT, tests and promotional policies, ATS reports and data for ENL's. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents are the most important stake-holder and the driver in the education of their children. Not only do they have the legal rights to be well-informed about their children's education but also their participation will directly impact their children's learning and well-being all round. The Title III program will hold parent workshops under that tenet or rationale. A tentative calendar of workshops is provided as below, • September and October: orientations, regulations and parents' rights, HLIS and LAB-R. • November and December: helping children at home, homework and student requirements. • January and February: helping children at home with reading, vocabulary work, resources. • March and April: Helping children at home in math, concepts and vocabulary, real life math. • May and June: NYSESLAT, tests and promotional policies, preparing for standardized tests. The workshops will be provided jointly by Geeta Persad, ENL teacher. Ample time will be given to parents for planning to attend the workshops. Letters or notices will go out in English and translations. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session 8,709 9 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Academic Before and After School Program  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff 0 n/a and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 11,236 0 0 19,945 Spotlight Into English curriculum; NYSESLAT Practice-Finish Line Workbook; Explode The Code Workbooks; Language Power Workbooks n/a n/a 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Lyndon B Johnson Borough Queens School Number 223 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Deborah Otto Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Geeta Persad Teacher/Subject Area Janice Perez Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider Theresa Fallarino Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Nicole Kelly Coach n/a School Counselor Carmen Chambers Parent Aliesha Johashen Parent Coordinator Diane Thomas Field Support Center Staff Member Joshua Metz Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 564 1 Total number of ELLs 35 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.21%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 4 0 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses different means to assess the early literacy skills of ENLs, such as Fountas and Pinnell. About 60 % of the ENL's scored one or two levels below the benchmarks of Fountas and Pinnell. The data indicates that the ENLs have more difficulty understanding the texts than the EP's due to limited English. The evidence correlates with the levels of ENLs. With limited English and mostly speaking their first languages at home, the new comers have greater obstacles in closing the gap between themselves and the EPs. The data implies that differentiated instruction is needed to help the new ENLs build a basic set of words and concepts which can serve as the background for building literacy skills. Also phonics skills may help the beginning level ENL's decode sounds of vocabulary. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2  The ENL teacher provides instruction by using the pull-out model. The ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teachers to design lessons that will lead to rigorous instruction while strengthening their English language development. Small groups in the classrooms offer explicit instruction that focus on learned sounds-spelling relationship then to actual reading.As always, our instruction is data driven and lessons and learning targets are aligned to standards and design to provide support in a systematic way to our struggling ELLs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ENL's depends on many factors. On the part of the school, we have made the best efforts to help our ENL's learn. We have used benchmark tests and ENL interim tests to monitor the students' progress. The ENL performance on the NYSESLAT is used to evaluate if our ENL program has met our goal and objectives. Last year we have exceeded our goals by a large margin. Additionally, summative assessments are given periodically to determine at a particular point in time what the ENL students know an do not know. Performance tasks, formative assessments is part of the instructional process that provides the information needed to adjust teaching and learning while they are happening. Our assessments informs both teachers and students about students' understanding at a point when timely adjustments can be made. Our on going assessments are particularly important for our ENL's. It provides a well -rounded picture of their skills, abilities and on going progress. In addition, the ENL teacher and classroom teachers can target their specific problems areas, adapt instruction and intervene earlier rather than later. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? All stakeholders review the data to determine the necessary skills and standards that individual students have yet to master based on the data. Once determined the teachers address the skills through mini lessons, small group instruction, center tasks, homework. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school has systemically evaluated and determined students' performance and needs using the benchmark tests for third, fourth and fifth grade students, and Fountas and Pinnel for all students. For Ells additional instruments such as the ELL periodic tests were administered. Data generated from informal and formal assessments are used for planning core instruction as well as delivering other layers of instruction using the RTI model. For example, we determined severe needs for three Ells in ELA and five Ells for math. And we planned and delivered specific and intensive instruction with targeted activities for them through small group settings. Three times a week, these students attended lunch-and-learn sessions. And a Saturday Academy will be open the ELLs this year. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. On the Last NYSESLAT, 9/18 or 50% of the ELLs are expanding, 2/18 or 11% of the ELLs reached transitioning and 4/18 or 22% are emerging. 3/18 or 16% of the ELLs scored at the beginning level. The proficiency levels are tied to the years of service. The two beginners are all new comers. The ELLs with two years of service or more tend to perform the best. They scored either at the advanced or proficiency level. The two IEP Ells moved up from entering and transitioning levels to transitioning and expanding levels. The overall performance exceeds last year with advance and proficiency level rising from 41.6% to 60% and beginning level dropping from 25% to 7%. This year on the LAB-R, two of the seven new Ells scored at the beginning level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The school leadership and classroom teachers and the ENL teacher meet to analyze data from the NYSESLAT, Math and ELA assessments to evaluate the progress of the ELLs and make any necessary adjustments to the schools' instructional plan. Part IV: ELL Programming 3  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have a pull-out model in our school. The ENL teacher analyze the scores from the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL to determine the proficiency level of each student. Groups are created based on the proficiency level and?or their grade level. All entering /emerging students receive 360 minutes per week of direct ENL instruction, Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of direct ENL instruction per week. Our commanding students receive 90 minutes of direct ENL instruction. In the classrooms, all ELLs receive rigorous instruction in order to meet grade level standards. During stand alone instruction, homogeneous groups of ELL students receive instruction in order to support English Language development in order to acquire the language needed for success in core content areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher looks at the current ELL population and create a schedule to accommodate the mandated number of instructional minutes for students at each proficiency level.The ENL teacher works with the classroom teachers to make sure the needs of the students are being met. Additionally, students are provided with support and scaffolding at strategic times. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas in math, science, and social studies are covered with scaffolding and other ENL approaches. For examples, for native language support, Spanish materials in math and social studies were purchased. Bilingual dictionaries are provided. The ENL teacher also use bilingual glossaries in math, science and social studies. Instruction includes read-aloud, teaching vocabulary, fiction and non-fiction, hands-on activities, visual aids, cooperative work, test preparation, and individual tutoring. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ENLs will be evaluated by the State Reading tests in Spanish and Chinese, class work, projects in native languages, school tests, and observations, when a bilingual program is formed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction will take place for ENL subgroups: A) Among the ENLs, no SIFE students have been identified. In the case of future ones, enhanced instruction in needed areas, and remedial support will be provided. An example will be to provide additional school and after-school sessions. 4  B) For the newcomers (less than three years), we will provide intensive and extensive ENL instruction, using various graded materials, multi-disciplinary books, technology, and ENL methodologies. For the past three years after-school ENL programs were provided to help the ENLs prepare for State tests. And this year the school will continue the support. For technology, purchased online learning sites such as Myon will expand to all grades and cover all content areas. Six computers with internet access have been set up for the ENLs and free online learning sites such as Starfall.com and Math.com may provide abundant interactive activities for the newcomers. C) With ENLs having received service 4-6 years, we will focus on their needed areas. In most cases, ELLS will receive an extension of service, unable to meet the reading and writing criteria. Differentiated instruction with remedial and reinforcing exercises will be provided. Examples of strategies and activities include the use of graphic organizers for reading and writing, vocabulary development, standards-driven writing portfolio, and test prep. After-school programs and Saturday Academy will be in place to address some of the ENLs' needs. D) Currently there are no Long Term ENLs. In the case of future ones, the same kind of strategies and methods targeting at special needs will be provided as above. E) With the ENLs reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT, we will keep maintenance by providing after-school programs, and occasionally arranging for tutoring as needs arise. These students will receive the same test accommodations as current ENLs on the State tests for two years after attaining proficiency on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENLs-SWDs will receive different help. Our plan is to help them meet higher expectations using different methods and materials so that the students will build stamina in work and stayed motivated and focused. For example, interactive computer-assisted work has proven quite effective for them. Some of the interactive software includes Daily Reader Series by Weekly Reader Corporation, Living Books Series by Random House/Broderbund Company, Soliloquy Reading Assistant, and Scholastic's Math Missions K-2 and 3-5. Methods suitable for individual student also include TPR, big pictures for vocabulary, illustrated content areas books, and hands-on activities. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school will set clear goals in the IEP for ELL-SWDs, and the teachers will receive and review the IEP carefully. Cuurently the school adopts a more inclusive approach for ELL-SWDs. They receive instruction with the general education ELLs with the help of educational assistants. Multicultural materials reflecting the curriculum are used and students will feel more accepted. A classroom with large space is provided for different activities. Instruction will be provided with further differentiation for ELL-SWDs and the use of some methods in the SIOP Model. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs identified for needs in ELA, math and other areas may receive intervention service by RTI teachers, special tutoring, and after-school and Saturday instruction. The RTI program uses Wilson, Foundations, Go Math. Some of the ELLs may receive speech service, physical therapy, guidance counseling, and help with the psychologists. Native languages may be used for best results in the above work. Furthermore, the ENL teacher works with the classroom teachers to provide differentiated instruction and targeted small group instruction during th ELA block. All instruction is delivered in English, however, Math is given in Spanish to students to support their progress in the classroom. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We use the Balanced Literacy approach to reading, which incorporates a variety of reading materials; Go Math; On line programs-lReady, MYON, Mathletics will be used in instruction this year. We also intend to support our ELL population with and after school program and a Saturday academy. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No program/services for ELLs will be discontinued in sight. 5  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. For examples, some ELLs attended the Outside of School Time program (OST), the after-school dance program. An after-school ESL program funded under Title III was run for the ELLs and former ELLs. The goal of this program is help the ELLs achieve better results on the New York State ELA and Math tests. Computers were purchased for the ELL program, and the ELLs have access to all new technologies. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of instructional materials including text books, readers, teacher-made materials have been used, and among them are ESL books such as Addison-Wesley ESL and Pearson’s Backpacks, content area materials such as Continental Press’s Finish Line Math, Language Power and the Curriculum Associates’ Strategies to Achieve Mathematics Success, bilingual content area materials such as books in Spanish math and social studies. Additional examples include big books, readers, bilingual picture dictionaries, and on-line learning sites such as MYON and Starfall.com. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is made available for the ENL's with bilingual materials, dictionaries, and content glossaries. ENL's with common languages are also paired for cooperative learning. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Instructional support and resources are tailored to needs of ELLs at different age and grade levels. The ELLs are graded by their ages and grades. The beginning and intermediate level students receive twice the instructional time. Small groups in the RTI model are used for students with special needs. Materials and activities are selected and tailored for differentiation. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? A variety of instructional materials including text books, readers, teacher-made materials have been used, and among them are ESL books such as Addison-Wesley ESL and Pearson’s Backpacks, content area materials such as Continental Press’s Finish Line Math and the Curriculum Associates’ Strategies to Achieve Mathematics Success, bilingual content area materials such as books in Spanish math and social studies. Additional examples include big books, readers, bilingual picture dictionaries, and on-line learning sites such as Study Island and Starfall.com. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The new ELLs receive a tour of the school with attention to key locations such as restrooms, health rooms, cafeteria, library, and the dismissal sites. They are introduced to their teachers for proper seating. Basic words and signs will be posted and explained with bilingual help. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently no foreign language courses are offered at the site. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 6  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Staff development will be provided for all school personnel including teachers, paraprofessionals, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapists, secretaries, parent coordinators, and assistant principals. Topics will include regulations and mandates regarding services for the ELLs, cultural awareness, LAB-R and NYSESLAT, ESL methodologies and materials, helping ELLS in the content areas, standards and State tests, parental involvement, translations, and technologies, etc. 2. Professional developments were offered on policies and regulations regarding ELLs, instructional strategies and approaches for ELLs, ENL standards and CCSS, content areas for ELLs. Workshops were run with the ENL teacher, coaches, and content area teachers 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 3. Through the school guidance counselors, the ELL personnel will be informed of the program choices and operational differences at the middle schools, and help the graduating ELLs select suitable schools and programs, overcome fears, and prepare for the unknown. . 4. The 7.5 hours of ELL training will be provided by the ENL/bilingual teacher, the math and literacy coaches, and other professionals to all school staff, topics including second language acquisition and practice, ENL standards, content areas, curriculum and assessment, scaffolding for ENL's throughout the Literacy Block , the teaching of academic vocabulary, and graphic organizers for writing. In the past year 7.5 hours of ENL training was successfully delivered. The workshops may be offered during the staff lunch periods and after school. The attendance will be kept on file, and teachers who have completed the 7.5 hours will receive principal's certifications. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All school-wide parent activities will involve parents of ELLs. Parents are given orientation workshops at the beginning of the school year. Notices/letters are sent out in bilingual versions. Special orientation workshops are given to parents of new ELLs. Bilingual signs are posted outside of the main office in the lobby. The parent coordinator and ENL teacher reach out by phone or written correspondence. Individual meetings are set up before and after school and on Parent - Teacher Tuesdays. Meetings are conducted in the parents preferred language and every attempt is made to have an translation services available. We also have a number of staff who speak languages other than English. DOE over the phone interpretation services is utilized if and when necessary. 7  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school offers a variety a wide range of opportunities for parents engagement. Meet the Teacher Night, PTA, Publishing Party, school trips, Science Fun Night, Winter Dance and parent Volunteer.The parent coordinator works closely with the ENL and classroom teachers and together with the principal and assistant principal to take an active role in planning and conducting activities. Parents are also invited to attend workshop that will help them to support their children. The learn different strategies to support so that they can support their children at home. Translators are available for the workshops. Our school also has an "Open Door" policy where parents are invited to come in and observe instructional practices that they can use to support their child at home. Our parent coordinator is the connection between parents and school in order to make sure that all parents including those of our ELLs are informed and up to date with everything that is going on at our school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Deborah Otto, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Deborah Otto Title Principal Nicole Kelly Assistant Principal Diane Thomas Parent Coordinator Geeta Persad ENL/Bilingual Teacher Aliesha Johashen Parent Janice Perez Teacher/Subject Area Theresa Fallarino Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Carmen Chambers School Counselor Mary Barton Joshua Metz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q223 School Name: Lyndon B Johnson Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Nicole Geeta Kelly Persad AP ENL Teacher yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents will receive all the necessary information and make choices for their children. Parent orientation is conducted by the ESL teacher and the parent coordinator for parents of new ELLs with parents’ guide, video demo, program selection forms, etc. The workshop will be run with bilingual support and all materials in bilingual forms made available for parents. Parents will make their own decisions on the choice of Bilingual Transitional Education, Dual Language or Freestanding ESL. If parents select a bilingual program their child, the school will assist the parents to contact the ELL Program Transfer at the Office of English Language Learners for the arrangement. A timeline of the orientation workshops includes one in September, and one in October, followed by other ones whenever newcomers arrive. 1  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 1 1 1 4 2 47 56 Bengali French Haitian Creole Urdu Punjabi Spanish Total % 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.52 0.26 6.11 7.3 1 1 1 4 5 48 60 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.52 0.65 6.24 7.8 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None of the parents' preferred languages represent at least a 10% of the schools' population. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School memos-ongoing all year, September-June Parent Handbook- September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Forms provided by the DOE are available in several languages and are downloaded in these languages. Additionally, many of our staff members are bilingual and provide services when needed. Our Parent Coordinator also works closely and effectively to insure that our translation needs are met. Forms provided by the DOE are available in several languages and are downloaded in these languages. Additionally, many of our staff members are bilingual and provide services when needed. Our Parent 2  School Calendars-ongoing all year, September-June First week of every month blue cards-registration packet- September or when they register Coordinator also works closely and effectively to insure that our translation needs are met. Forms provided by the DOE are available in several languages and are downloaded in these languages. Additionally, many of our staff members are bilingual and provide services when needed. Our Parent Coordinator also works closely and effectively to insure that our translation needs are met. Forms provided by the DOE are available in several languages and are downloaded in these languages. Additionally, many of our staff members are bilingual and provide services when needed. Our Parent Coordinator also works closely and effectively to insure that our translation needs are met. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent meetings every Tuesday, Every Tuesday Parent Teacher Conferences, November, March & May interpretation service(s)? The ENL Department, Office Staff, classroom teachers, guidance counselors and social worker will work together to create a coordinated process for ongoing communication with ENL parents. The school ENL Coordinator will assist in coordination efforts and the monitoring of materials selected for translators and/or translating in addition times available. Use of over the phone interpretation is used on an as needs basis. The ENL Department, Office Staff, classroom teachers, guidance counselors and social worker will work together to create a coordinated process for ongoing communication with ENL parents. The school ENL Coordinator will assist in coordination efforts and the monitoring of materials selected for translators and/or translating in addition times available. 3  curriculum nights, Monthly workshops held by teachers and Parent Coordinator, Weekly/Monthly Over the phone interpretation is used. Pupil Path & DOJO can translate information in native language. The ENL Department, Office Staff, classroom teachers, guidance counselors and social worker will work together to create a coordinated process for ongoing communication with ENL parents. The school ENL Coordinator will assist in coordination efforts and the monitoring of materials selected for translators and/or translating in addition times available. Over the phone interpretation can be used as well. The ENL Department, Office Staff, classroom teachers, guidance counselors and social worker will work together to create a coordinated process for ongoing communication with ENL parents. The school ENL Coordinator will assist in coordination efforts and the monitoring of materials selected for translators and/or translating in addition times available. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school parent coordinator created a school wide face book page that inform parents of a school emergency. We also implement the use of School Messenger in addition to utilizing our classdojo. Class Dojo communicates to parents in their native language well. We can utilize the over the phone translator as well. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school staff will be informed through on going series of Professional Development on regular Monday PDs as well as interclass visitations during grade level common prep. The ENL Coordinator and teacher will establish the new communication process and make sure all translated materials are kept in the ENL Coordinators' office. Report cards, Homework Help and Behavioral reports in several languages will be available. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 4  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are aware of their rights to receive information through PTA meetings, parent teacher conferences and workshops held by Parent coordinator and ENL teacher. The LAC is trained in order to implement and inform the school community about the language access services available for the school and the parents. The LAC will verify that all information is disseminated to parents directly and necessary policies are posted and clearly visible in the school building. Additionally, all members of the school are informed of their responsibilities in regards to the regulations and their implementation. We have the welcome poster displayed in the main entrance, in addition to the parent guides available when needed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Surveys 5 
