 25Q250 School Name: I.S. 250 THE ROBERT F. KENNEDY COMMUNITY MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: TARA MRWIK   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Robert F. Kennedy Magnet School of Community Studies Intermediate School 250 342500010250 6,7,8 School Number (DBN): 25Q250 158-40 76 th Road Flushing New York 11366 718-591-9000 Phone Number: 718-591-2340 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Tara A. Mrwik tmrwik@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Tara A. Mrwik Michael Berezovsky SalamataBathily David Schwartz N/A N/A TaliaBanks District Information Geographical District: 25 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mrs. Danielle DiMango Superintendent: 30-40 Linden Place Flushing, New York 11354 ddimang@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 281-7605 Phone Number: (718) 281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   District 25 FSC: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North LICNY 11014 Executive Director’s Office Address: lpender@school;s.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Tara A. Mrwik Michael Berezovsky SalamataBathily N/A N/A N/A TaliaBanks Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Steve Farrington Joseph Alzheimer David Schwartz Robert Laurie Ari Kapoutsos Karen Eitleberg Luis Arroyo Angel Minor Jessica Barkan Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Observer/ CSA Observer/ DC37 Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/UFT Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview I.S.250 is a small learning community which promotes lifelong learners, who possess strong character, self-worth, and the tools needed to be productive citizens. Students will acquire the knowledge and skill set to be college and career ready through rigorous curriculum that addresses our diverse learners. While flourishing in a school that celebrates multiculturalism, acceptance, and individuality, all students are empowered to be confident, tolerant, and empathetic   with their community. Our mission is to build a solid foundation focusing on social responsibility, hope for the future and lifelong success. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Robert F. Kennedy Community Middle School is a diverse multi-cultural community of academic learners that was created to meet the needs of students interested in a small learning environment. Students at R.F.K appreciate having a small student population of 400 students and supportive staff who are familiar with them. Of that population, 28% of our students are Asian, 29% African American, 27% Hispanic, 13% White, and 3% other. At R.F.K, the percentage of our students who met State standards on the State English test increased from 33% in 2016-2017 to 45% in 2017-2018. The percentage of our students who met State standards on the State Math test increased from 29% in 2016-2017 to 35% in 2017-2018. Our proficiency rating for 8th grade students who took the N.Y.S. science exam is 46%. Our English language learners who tested proficient on the NYSESLAT exam was 28%. 93 % is the average pass rate for core subjects such as math, English, social studies, and science. All of the instructional resources that we are incorporating into our curriculum will assist us with helping close the achievement gap. In addition, RFK250 has been chosen for a Sustainable Professional Learning Pilot series “SPLP” which is a pilot program focused on identifying a school-wide focus and creating a professional development plan that is sustained throughout the school year. This Professional Learning Pilot will provide high quality professional development to improve teacher pedagogy, based on the Danielson Framework 3c: Engaging Student in Learning. Throughout the school year, teachers will be engaged in cycles of inquiry focused on designing rigorous learning tasks, student engagement in rich classroom discussions, students independently using scaffolds, student choice of learning activities and student self-reflection on the learning process. The long term goal for this pilot is for teachers to be able to replicate this work for future instructional foci with minimal support to plan professional development that directly impacts students learning. To further help our students academically, we offer an ELA and Math Intervention Academy after school, a Saturday English Language Learner Academy, and developed a partnership with the Queens College Initial Clinical Experience program. Every fall, Queens College sends two student teachers to each math classroom to assist with meeting the needs or our students while providing the student teachers with a valuable experience as they further their careers in education. Furthermore, to help support our school environment we created a variety of after-school activities to participate in: Student Government, CHAMPS Basketball Team, CHAMPS Volleyball Team, CHAMPS Dance, Science Club, Editorial Club, Jewelry Design Club, Pop Up book making club, Learning Language Through Game, and an Art Club. This year we are continuing the following initiatives: Beautiful Me Project, Kids at Hope, and Restorative Justice. We are now entering our third year of Restorative Justice practices here at IS250. We have a part time Restorative Justice coach that works with staff and students in teaching de-escalation strategies and focuses on repairing harm through inclusive processes such as restorative mediation in order to engage all stakeholders. New for this year, we are implementing a peer mediation program. Students will be trained on how to facilitate a mediation between students who are in conflict. The intention of these initiatives is to teach the staff and students self respect, how to build healthy relationships and make better decisions. They also give educators the tools they need to teach students that they can overcome any obstacles in life and be successful. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  The percentage of English Language Learners at R.F.K. is 18% and students with IEPs at 27%. Our English language learners increased their English proficiency from 12% to 48% during the 2015-2016 school year. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of strength for Robert F. Kennedy Intermediate School 250 include creating rigorous, engaging and coherent curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards that challenge and push our students thinking. GO MATH challenges our students with multi-step real world problems that allow our students to see how math is used in everyday situations and Expeditionary Learning where students engage in interdisciplinary, in-depth study of compelling topics, in groups and in their community, with assessment coming through cumulative products, public presentations, and portfolios. Passport, the new social studies curriculum also focuses on content and how to use reading strategies to make meaning. This year, we will continue to build a school culture where students and staff feel valued and can succeed. Knowing our students and assessing their individual needs both academically and emotionally will increase student engagement and promote student success. Understanding that all children can succeed no exceptions is our vision. In conjunction with improving school culture we would like to increase parent engagement. To keep parents informed on a daily basis of how their child is doing academically, we have purchased Skedula and Pupilpath which is an online grade book that parents can access daily to see their child's progress. In addition, I.S.250 teachers use Class DoJo an online application that allows teachers to immediately contact parents via their cell phones. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q250 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 399 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 40 11 11 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 13 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 82.0% % Attendance Rate 71.9% % Reduced Lunch 15.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.5% 27.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.05 3% 27% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 44.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 56 56 93.1% 8.3% 18.8% 23.3% 35.8% 3.8% 2 30% 3.3 35.4% 44% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES NO NO N/A NO NO N/A NO N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strengths:  As per our most recent Quality Review feedback, school leaders consistently communicate high expectations to staff and clearly articulated school-wide instructional goals aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching.  As per our most recent 2016-2017 Quality Review feedback, the staff addresses the social an emotional needs of our students by embedding Restorative practices into their classrooms.  As per our most recent 2016-2017 Quality Review feedback, students are provided with curricula aligned to the C.C.LS. that integrates the instructional shifts for ELA and Math. Students engage in rigorous tasks to build critical thinking skills.  As per our most recent 2016-2017 Quality Review feedback, teachers are using assessment strategies aligned to the curricula to provide feedback to students in order to further the learning process.  As per our most recent 2016-2017 Quality Review feedback, school leaders feedback to teachers accurately captures strengths, challenges, and next steps aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching.  Ell Data demonstrates there was an increase from 12% to 48% proficiency Priorities:  Percentage of level 3 and 4 on the 2018 NYS ELA exam was 45%- increase of 12%  Percentage of level 3 and 4 on the 2018 NYS MATH exam was 35%- increase of 6%  Students with Special Needs are not making significant gains towards meeting proficiency levels. In addition to the findings, we will be focusing on student engagement and differentiation to ensure that identified areas of needs are being addressed through text and task in turn creating an environment where there students are engaged in rigorous tasks and scaffolds are in place to support these students to be individually successful. In our most recent 2016-2017 Quality Review report, indicator 1.2 pedagogy was developing. In addition during District walk troughs, pedagogy was also identified as and area in need of improvement. The following are highlighted areas that we will work on: 3  Findings: Across classrooms, teaching strategies inconsistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula. Student work products and student participation are uneven across classrooms. Impact : Uneven entry points do not consistently provide opportunities for all students, including English Language Learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities to engage in critical thinking and participation in discussions.  Although there is evidence of learning activities aligned to the C.C.L.S such as students having to state a claim and provide evidence to justify their reasoning, within many classrooms, students of varied ability levels were working on the same task. Teachers need to continue to assess students and use that data to provide differentiated learning tasks with scaffolds to help support students at their varied instructional levels.  Elements of teaching practices were inconsistent across classrooms, particularly in the areas of questioning and discussion, the improvement of protocols for discussions and refinement of tasks would ensure the level of rigor in classroom conversations. Learning Environment Survey indicates:  62% if teachers state that students build upon each others ideas  51% of teachers state that students use data to support ideas  46% of teachers state that students provide productive feedback to peer/teachers  69% of teachers state that students participate in classroom discussions  61% of students state that they learn a lot from feedback on their work  79% of students state that what they do in class is good preparation for assessment  79% of students state that they know what their teacher wants them to learn Based on the above mentioned data, it is evident that there is a need to research and identify targeted strategies to close the achievement gap of Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. To ensure instruction is customized, inclusive , motivating and engaging, we need to focus on planning and pedagogy to meet the individual needs of our students with access to rigorous tasks and text. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, all teachers will plan engaging activities that include differentiated tasks and scaffolds so that students can independently succeed with challenging tasks as evidenced by 90% of teachers rated as Effective or Highly Effective in 3c and 1e. on the Danielson Framework for Teaching and students demonstrating a 6% increase on NYSELA and NYS Math assessments. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Sustainable Professional Learning Pilot   PLO's offering on assessment from BFSC  Data analysis of multiple data sets  Focused Professional Development on the following topics:-Formative assessment practices including: data analysis of assessments, use of effective feedback to further student learning, student self-assessment and monitoring, using student data to plan and as an inquiry focus, and differentiated instruction, rigor of tasks Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September 2018-2019 Administration, Instructional Team, Instructional Mentors, District offered Professional Development  Renaissance STAR MATH and ELA training  Provide students with rigorous experiences grounded , GO MATH, DOY and CMP3  Curriculum review and refinement to include Socratic Seminars/Debates  Use of Academic Vocabulary  Clear, well-structured instruction  Interactive classrooms where students take accountability of their learning  Rigorous tasks and planning scaffolds  Using effective feedback as a means to monitor and further the knowledge of students  Researched based best practices for differentiating for SWD’s and ELL’s  Provide targeted professional development on effective differentiation based on student data to meet individual needs  Analyze student assessment data to identify deficiencies and align instruction and tasks appropriately  Provide descriptive feedback to address student’s areas in need of improvement  Using data collected to create instructional groups   Develop an after school instructional program to provide Flexible grouping additional academic support to our identified target population Saturday Academy focusing on English Language Learners’ language acquisition skills  5  Model accountable talk and have students build upon their classmates discussions using the techniques that have been demonstrated  Multiple entry points for all learners  Opportunities for rigorous accountable talk in all content areas to engage in deepening the knowledge of topics Inquiry based discussions and lessons   Discussion protocols in place 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Regularly Scheduled meetings with parents of English Language Learner to address specific language acquisition needs  Additional Administrative support to implement reading strategies in Science and Social Studies departments  Regularly scheduled meetings to review Individual Educational Plans for Students with Disabilities to ensure the proper placement and appropriate goal setting SIT meeting to review IEP supports and recommendations School Leadership Meetings   Parental Workshops   Translation of documents distributed to parents  Content Family Night  PPT monthly meetings to discuss at-risk students  Grade level meetings to discuss academic and behavior  Quarterly Progress reports    Open House/ Meet the teacher night  Pupilpath  Use of Star Assessments to guide parent conferences and remediation for students Family Newsletter School Wide Calendar Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Use of Monday and Tuesday’s additional time for curriculum revisions and SPLP  Common Prep periods ( Paid at coverage rate of $38.38 )  C-6 position for common planning  Academic Intervention Academy (Per-session rate- Teacher- $45.65/hour, Administrator- $47.31/hour, Secretary- @28.14/hour) Saturday English New Language Learners Academy(see above per-session rates) Inter-visitations scheduled for inquiry study   Monthly Scheduled SLT meetings   Department meetings   STAR assessment $4400 Skedula- $ 4,250 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2018, 60% of teachers will be in the Effective/Highly Effective range in 3c. and 1e.  60 % of teachers have made refinements to lesson plans, curriculum, and have assessed tasks to ensure rigor  By February 2018, there will be an increase in students independent and instructional reading levels as evidenced on the interim STAR reading assessment and an increase in students independent mathematics level from STAR Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) report cards IEP progress reports STAR assessment data  Progress reports     Cycles of Inquiry agendas and showcases  Advance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: I.S. 250 has one Assistant Principal, a guidance counselor and a dean of students to service all of our students   6th grade will receive 2 period/week for advisories and 7&8th grade will receive 1pd/week advisories  New York Child Center hosts a Beacon Program and SONYC program which approximately 100 students attend We have partnered up with the School Response Team form NY Foundling agency which consists of a social worker, family worker and psychologists to assist in referrals for students and families that need support  Training will be provided on the discipline code, cyber bullying, and respect for all for staff and students  Continued Partnership with Beautiful Me Foundation: Empowering and educating young females to values themselves, make good choices and build healthy relationships  Kids at Hope Foundation which will train adult staff to look at how perception can make a child have hope of be "at risk". Using a Framework we will be trained that all children can succeed no exceptions and how to take a child that struggles and work on being successful  Restorative Circle training has been provided to 24 staff members  Restorative Justice Pilot School, year 3- New peer mediation program will start Fall 2018  25 trained staff member in TCIS- crisis management/de-escalation strategies Priorities: Reviewing the most recent data from the 2017-18 Framework for Great Schools report indicates it is evident that there is a need to improve in the areas of Supportive Environment as the schools average scored consistently lower that the city average.  NYC Learning Environment Survey 2017-18 demonstrates: o 64% of our students state they feel safe around this school o 67% of our students state they safe in the hallways, locker rooms, and cafeteria o 59% of our students state that their teachers notice if they are having trouble learning something o 44% of our students state that that teachers notice when they are upset o 54% of our students state that students follow rules in class o 37% of our students state that students behave well when the teacher is not watching As a result of the analysis of this data, we need to improve the overall culture of the building to create a place where students can be a part of an environment that promotes high social, behavioral, and academic expectations as evidenced by a decrease in 5/6 indicators. All students should feel safe and have a "person" in the building that can speak to their emotional and academic progress. Based on this data, children are not at ease and feel this is a safe 8  environment and therefore may be having difficulties with managing their emotions, which can be the reason for the large percentage of OORS reports and absenteeism/ lateness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, we will foster a supportive environment for all community members by implementing Restorative practices, therapeutic crisis interventions (TCIS) and a focus on social emotional learning, resulting in a 5% reduction of level 3, 4, and 5 infractions as evidenced by OORS data and decrease student lateness by 75% 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All students will receive 1-2 periods of advisory at a 15:1 ratio focusing on: 1. conflict resolution 2. peer mediation 3. community building 4. bullying 5. anger management 6. tolerance 7. Respect for All 8. De-escalation strategies Daily Embedded Strategies include:  Morning meetings in lieu of homerooms  Differentiation of instruction to meet all students needs  Teaching critical thinking skills in all content areas which carry over to better decision making and an understanding of consequence  Organizational skills taught to be successful in middle school  Building social, emotional, and academic confidence in September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Guidance, SAPIS, Parsons Beacon Program, DEAN, MRT, C.H.A.M.P.S Teachers, Administration, Guidance Students, All members of RFK Community students School Uniforms to promote solidarity and community Student of the month to celebrate successes   Competitions to support positive behavior   Honor Roll  Arista   Content Family Nights-student celebrate their work and Science Fair cultural diversity  Community Based Organizations partnerships with Child Center New York  Creation of after school activities as requested by students: Art Club, Magma Club, Editorial Club, Language though games club, and Student Government 0   Teacher and Student created clear expectations for    classroom and common area behaviors Functional Behavioral Analysis fo students that need additional supports Staff circles Scholar centric to assess our students emotional well being Planned activities to recognize hard work and school spirit:     Staff versus student athletic competitions Spirit Week- Fall and Spring Student basketball team Student CHAMPS dance team Training/Programs:  Respect For All Training  Training on Discipline Code  Restorative Circle Training  Peer Mediation Training  KAH training  Beautiful Me Project-training for young women to promote social and academic success.  Restorative partnerships  De-escalation protocols: TCIS certified teachers  Safety procedures Training from School Response Team    Focusing on de escalation Stress reduction for teachers Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will be included in all programs to address specific academic and social needs. Staff Students September 2018-June 2019  Differentiated instruction planned using data to ensure that all students needs are being met and students are challenged and intellectually engaged in a task Small group, 1:1 instruction to remediate deficiencies   Advisories  At Risk Counseling  Partnerships with Beacon/SONYC program  Kids At Hope team celebrations for teacher and student achievement  RJ Collaboration with Ramapo Coach  Creation of Individual Crisis Management Plans (ICMP) to address individual needs Administration, Guidance, SAPIS, Parsons Beacon Program, DEAN, MRT, C.H.A.M.P.S, Teachers N/A please advise 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. School Leadership Meetings Student of the Month family celebrations  Parental Workshops, including Kids AT Hope, Restorative Justice and Beautiful Me    Translation of documents distributed to parents  Content Family Nights  Grade level meetings to discuss academic and identify behavior supports needed to create ICMP's with parents  Pupil Path  Class DoJo  Monthly PTA meetings  Weekly Student Government meetings Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher to Facilitate Weekly Student Government Meetings  Disciplinary Procedures-Clear expectations, Ladder of Restoration, student behavioral modifications, and student contracts Scheduled auditorium periods for advisories  Advisory periods embedded into student schedule- 1/2 pds/week for 6,7,8th grade at 15:1 ratio  Cycles of Beautiful Me for female students   Monday's Professional Learning Communities  Time for teacher collaboration to discuss students’ needs and to develop plans  Creation of B.I.P.’s/ ICMP's for those students who require them  SIT meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, OORS data will show a decrease of student level 3, 4, & 5 infraction by 3%  Student lateness will decrease by 50% Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Suspension reports   OORS data  Restorative Justice agendas and attendance records  PPT agendas and attendance records   ATS attendance data  Scholar Centric data used to identify areas to focus on in advisories and at-risk counseling Late log 2   Morning meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Instructional Leads to model best practices and facilitate Sustainable Professional Learning Pilot Instructional Cabinet    Continued collaboration between English Language Arts teacher and Social Studies teachers to roll out Project Based Learning  Roll out of Instructional focus plan including review of data, identifying a problem of practice and opportunities for time to practice strategies (Bridge to practice) to monitor student outcomes. Priorities: The most recent 2016-17 Quality Review report in the quality indicator 1.2 pedagogy we received a developing and the following was indicated: Findings: Across classrooms, teaching strategies inconsistently provide multiple entry points into the curricula. Student work products and student participation are uneven across classrooms. Impact : Uneven entry points do not consistently provide opportunities for all students, including English Language Learners (ELLs) and students with disabilities to engage in critical thinking and participation in discussions. 1. In a classroom, students were not required to provide evidence to justify their stated claims. All of the students worked on the same task. There were no opportunities for students to use scaffolds to help support them at their varied instructional levels. 2. There was no modeling by the teacher of how to take notes or scaffolds to support students at their 3. instructional levels. The students did not engage in discussion and had no opportunities for critical thinking. In a grade eight ICT social studies class, while the students formulated open-ended questions as they read an article about the Great Depression, they worked independently and did not engage in discussions about the article. Thus, an opportunity was missed for all students, including students with disabilities, to collaboratively support their comprehension and target key information to create their questions. Recent Data on the Learning Environment Survey 2017-18 indicates the following: 4   89% of teachers are trying to improve their teaching  86% of teachers are willing to try new ideas  80% of teachers feel responsible that all students learn  77% of teachers make a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at their grade levels  80% of teachers agree that they design instructional programs together, ex: unit of student and lessons.  63% of teachers agree that Supervisors at their school participate in instructional planning with teachers. It is evident that we need to improve the cycles of inquiry in the building to address the coherence of implementation of school goals In addition, we need to look closely at student work as our focus of inquiry to improve student outcomes and ensure that tasks are rigorous and aligned to CCLS, Our staff needs to coordinate their teaching with their peers to ensure student success. Despite gains that were made in collaborative teachers, we are still performing lower than the district and city average. Administrators will take the role as a Coach to the Instructional Leads during cycles of inquiry. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers teams will engage in three cycles of inquiry focusing on student engagement in all content areas resulting in 75% of students in focus groups completing tasks and meeting or exceeding lesson objectives. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Content Area Curriculum Review and Refinement to Teachers include a variety of differentiated texts for divers learners.  Cycles of Peer Inter-visitations using protocols-Collaborative Learning Through Peer Inter-visitation: A tool kit for Educators  Use of Inquiry protocols, Norms & rounds  Developing criteria to identify elements of a rigorous Instructional Cabinet Administrators Students task  Common planning for ELA, MATH, SS  Project Based Learning collaboration between ELA and  SS departments Five Menu items to choose from for the three Inquiry Cycles focusing on Student Engagement and Differentiation. STAR Assessment Literacy Book clubs Intervention Academy Saturday ENL Academy      Use of discussion protocols to promote college and Teachers Instructional Cabinet career readiness Inquiry Cycles to improve student outcomes (Including bridge to practice) Identifying trends and patterns and next steps.   Administrators Students September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teaching Staff, September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teaching Staff, xo 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School wide progress reports given four times a year STAR assessment data- 3x's/year IEP progress reports given four times a year     Quarterly Family Newsletter 6   Use of Class Do-Jo to communicate progress to parents  Pupil Path to increase parent support and engagement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Cycles of Inter-visitations- coverage for teachers (38.38/coverage)  Monday& Tuesday professional time used to refine curriculum based on data collected during inquiry  District/ Borough Professional Learning Opportunities professional development and workshops to support pedagogy  Protocols for looking at student work pieces (Norms & Rounds)  Sustainable Professional Learning Pilot-including Administration and Lead Teacher and support form Borough Field Support Center Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, 50% of all teachers will have engaged in professional learning opportunities focused on student engagement and 50% of students in focus group will be successfully completing tasks assigned Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Review of Inquiry minutes  Review of curriculum maps  Walk through notes and checklists  Review of per-interim and post assessment data  Advance data with a focus on 1e. planning and 3c. student engagement  Student work samples from focus group Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Areas of Strengths:  Curriculum development, modifications of tasks, creation of scaffolds and lesson planning Priorities:  Percentage of level 3 and 4 on the 2017 NYS ELA exam was 45%  Percentage of level 4 and 4 on the 2017 NYS MATH exam was 35% The most recent 2015-2016 Quality Review report in the quality indicator 1.2 pedagogy we received a developing and the following was indicated:   Findings: Although some classrooms demonstrated teaching practices and strategies aligned to the curriculum with scaffolded learning activities to provide rigor and challenge for all learners, in other classrooms, teachers struggled with effective planning and implementation of curriculum and tasks. Impact : As a result of varied teaching practices; some students do not demonstrate high levels of thinking and participation in their learning or have an accurate understanding of content as demonstrated in their work products and group discussions.  Although there is evidence of data collection during lessons in the form of questioning, exit slips and KWL charts, not all teachers are using this data to design and implement effective practices that will address the standards in a way that students understand and will allow them to work independently or with their peers.  Although there are clear scaffolds within units of study for access and enrichment, such as translated writing prompts and graphic organizers and enrichment activities built into lessons, there were limited times within classrooms observed that allowed students to fully engage in activities, where these tools could support autonomy and ownership. In addition, on the QR report, while the school was rated proficient in 4.2 Teacher Team and Leadership Development the following was indicated:  Teachers concluded that although these were good tools to implement in the classroom, they did not necessarily improve student outcomes which led to a redefining of their focus to close this achievement gap.  While teacher teams are teacher led and there is consistent analysis of data and student work products, teachers are not receiving sufficient ongoing support to fully promote school-wide instructional coherence. 8  For example, in both the math and ELA meetings observed, it was evident that teachers had analyzed state and pre and post assessment data to determine gaps in student learning and engaged in inquiry around how to incorporate effective practices to improve students understanding of theme and fractions. However, students till struggled to make significant gains in identified areas. The learning Environment Survey indicates:  35% of teachers state that when a new project starts there is follow up  71% of teaches state that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across the different grade levels  69% of teachers state that Administration carefully tracts academic progress  71% of teachers state that Administration knows what is going on in their class It is evident based upon the data that is presented there is a need to improve systems that will strengthen Leadership practices and set systems to monitor the academic progress of students and follow up with new initiatives. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, all teachers will have the opportunity to engage in two cycles of inter-visitations through the Sustainable Professional Learning Pilot to assess the instructional focus on student engagement, with administrative coaching inquiry groups, resulting in 90% of staff performing in the Effective or Highly Effective range in Domain 1 and Domain 3 on Charlotte Danielson Teaching Framework. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Handbook: Collaborative Learning Through Peer Inter-visitation: A Toolkit for Educators SPLP Learning Cycles manuals   Using feedback to further develop a teachers pedagogical practices. Handbook: CIPL Professional Learning Series, The Power of Feedback: Supporting Teacher Development Instructional Leads as "open classrooms" to observe best practices   Additional administrative support from BFSC 2    days/month to work with Instructional Leads and Administration Sustainable Professional Learning Pilot Instructional Cabinet Monthly walk-through with focus on student engagement and differentiated Feedback from Inter-visitations /instructional walk-troughs will assist in supporting our subgroups  Refinements in curriculum, tasks, and lesson plans to ensure that tasks are rigorous and differentiated Small groups instruction to identify individual needs of students   Multiple data sets for teachers to analyze and use for planning rigorous tasks, discussions and engaging lessons  Departmental research based best practice for implementing reading strategies in content areas  Content area focused PLC's to improve monitoring of student learning September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teaching Staff, Instructional Mentors, BFSC Teachers Instructional Mentors,Students Administrators,BFSC Teachers Instructional Mentors, Students Administrators September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teaching Staff, Instructional Mentors,Teacher Development Coach xxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Leadership Meetings  Regularly Scheduled meetings with parents  Regularly scheduled meetings to review Individual Educational Plans for Students with Disabilities  Parental Workshops   Translation of documents distributed to parents  Content Family Nights  PPT monthly meetings to discuss at-risk students  Grade level meetings to discuss academic and behavior  Quarterly Progress reports    Open House/ Meet the teacher night Newsletters introducing content overview Skedula to increase parent communication and monitoring of student progress   Class DOJO Family Newsletters School Wide Calendars Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Inter-school visitations  Professional Development on Peer Inter-visitation  Power of Feedback Handbook  Protocols for discussion around student work samples   Coverages for host/visiting teachers ( Rate of $38.38)  Professional development series offered by the Queens Borough Field Support Center   District/Borough Professional learning Opportunities- per-diem coverage   Achieve 3000 Skedula STAR Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 50% of the staff has shown growth in at least in area of component 3 as evidenced by advance data  Peer Feeback reflections  Programs Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1  Inter-visitation low inference notes   planning notes  post observations conferences  Advance data for implementation of strategies  Walk-through data assessment checklists  Revisions/Refinements made to curriculum to include assessment practices Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  Monthly PTA meetings in conjunction with our Student of the Month celebration  Monthly SLT meetings  Quarterly Progress reports  Open House  Content Family Nights   Parental Involvement on the Restorative Justice Action Team Fund raising- Candy sale, picture day, spirit wear Learning Environment Survey states:  59% of parents state that they have been asked to or have volunteered time to support this school  85% of parents state that they have communicated with their child's teacher in regards to performance  67% of parents state that they have been invited to visit classrooms Priorities:  Data indicates that currently we average 22 parents at our Monthly Parent Association Meetings, which is 7 more parents than the previous year  54% of parents completed the NYC School Survey, which is 10% higher than 2015-16 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, we will support families by designing workshops aligned to schools instructional goals with a specific focus on literacy and mathematics, which will result in a 6% increase on student proficiency levels on NYSELA and NYSMATH assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Guidance, SAPIS, SBO’s, Parent Coordinator, SLT, P.A., Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Administration, Guidance, SAPIS, SBO’s, Parent Coordinator, SLT, P.A., Teachers  Professional Development for members of SLT, PA and Teachers Parent Coordinator  Open House opportunity  Parent Information nights  Tuesday Professional Learning Opportunities for parents during parent engagement Instructional Cabinet Administrators Students Teacher Parents  Regularly Scheduled meetings with parents of English Teachers Language Learner to address specific language acquisition needs  Regularly scheduled meetings to review Individual Educational Plans for Students with Disabilities School Leadership Meetings  Parental Workshops   Translation of documents distributed to parents  Content Family Nights  PPT monthly meetings to discuss at-risk students  Grade level meetings to discuss academic and behavior  Quarterly Progress reports    Open House/ Meet the teacher night Family Newsletters School Wide Calendar Instructional Cabinet Administrators Students Teacher Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable.  Work with CBO’s -Child Center of New York to plan workshops and other activities for parents throughout the school year, including how families can support children  Beautiful Me Training for guardians 4   Administrators, the Parent Coordinator, and PA leaders conduct surveys to gain input from families about their specific needs to develop workshop opportunities.  Quarterly Newsletter outlining curriculum expectations across all content areas  Use of the phone messenger systems  Website to relay messages, due dates and workshops/PA meetings  Use of Class Do-Jo to inform parents of students academic and behavioral progress  Multiple opportunities throughout the school year for parents to visit classroom, participate in celebrations and attend performances. Skedula to improve parent communication and progress monitoring of students  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Translation services for parental outreach  Professional Development for Parent Association, SLT, and Parent Coordinator  Teacher time to collaborate with Parent Association to develop relevant work shops District level support to train Parent Association, School Leadership Team and Parent Coordinator to facilitate productive PA meeting and workshops.  Partnering CBOs  Parent Coordinator Meetings hosted by Dr. Michael Dantona, PLF Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2018 there will be evidence of at least 1 parent meeting by pedagogues each month focusing on curriculum and student engagement and 1/ month with the Parent Coordinator Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Parent sign in sheets  Professional Development attendance sheet Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● PPT conferences ● State scores ● Teacher Referral ● Classroom performance ● Formative assessment ● Summative assessment Mathematics ● PPT conferences ● State scores ● Teacher Referral ● Classroom performance Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ELA AIS is being implemented in several different ways: ● Differentiated instruction in all ELA classes- Tier I Intervention Tier III Academy For Targeted Students – Saturday ELL Academy focusing on Reading, Writing, Speaking, and Listening for the NYSESLAT. Additionally, a weekday Intervention Academy focusing on one hour of reading and writing strategies based on informational texts and CCLS framed tasks. AIS in math is being implemented in several ways: ● Differentiated instruction and Scaffolded Tasks based on data in all Both Small group and/or one-to-one During school, after-school hours, and Saturdays. Intervention Academy- after school on Wednesday, and Thursday for a total number of hours-3 Both Small group and/or one-to-one Both during and after-school hours. Intervention Academy- after school on Wednesday's and Thursdays for a total 6  ● Formative assessment ● Summative assessment Science ● PPT conferences ● State scores ● Teacher Referral ● Classroom performance ● Formative assessment ● Summative assessment Social Studies ● PPT conferences ● State scores ● Teacher Referral Math classes-Tier I intervention ● Through frequent content and skills based assessment the effectiveness of Tier I intervention will be determined. Students who are not benefiting from Tier I will be referred for Tier II intervention AIS. Tier III – After school Intervention Academy focusing on CCLS multi-step real world application problems AIS is being implemented in several different ways: ● The use of content and genre reflect Science Content ● Differentiated instruction in all Science classes- Tier I Intervention ● Students who are not benefiting from Tier I will be referred for Tier III interventions- After-school program and during the school day AIS services AIS is being implemented in several different ways: ● The use of content and genre reflect of three hours per week. Both Small group and/or one-to-one Both during and after-school hours . Magma Club 1 1./2 hours per week Both Small group and/or one-to-one Both Small group and/or one-to-one 7 One-to-one basis School counselors, Psychologist, Social Worker, will provide guidance and counseling services during the school day. One period a week or more if needed, to all students at risk. ● Classroom performance At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● PPT conferences ● State scores ● Teacher Referral ● Classroom performance ● Formative assessment ● Summative assessment Social Studies Content The use of the NEwSocial Studies Passport frameworkto identify and differentiate students needs ● School counselors will provide guidance and counseling services during the school day. One period a week or more if needed, to all students at risk. The service is offered in English and Spanish. Students are assisted in learning how to deal with personal and academic issues including school, friends, family, organizational skills, time management and preparation for high school. ● The school psychologist will offer clinical services. They will observe at-risk students that are in possible need of an evaluation. In addition, the psychologist will observe and test all triennial students ● Social worker will provide counseling services to at-risk students during the school day for one or more periods a week as needed. Students will be assisted in 8  dealing with family crisis, and various personal issues. In addition, the social worker will work with the families of students that are in need of their mandated three year revaluation for Special Education services. ● Health related services are offered to all students as needed. Students are assisted in learning how to deal with health related issues. In addition, the school nurse works with students to educated them on the medicine that they are administered, good eating habits and hygiene ● Mobile Response Team-Child Center of New 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 18 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. SRT referrals for assistance   AIS services  After school Intervention programs  Parent Meeting and Conferences  Academic Programs & educational intervention support services   Counseling services  Data collection to assess the needs/progress of STH  Outreach efforts to identify the STH population and help them Supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0   After school Intervention Academy  At-Risk counseling  Restorative Justice Practices  Beautiful Me Project (females)  All clubs that are offered   Mobile Crisis Team Introduction to SBO Beacon Program 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Mentors will be assigned to support new teachers and teachers who need assistance.  Ongoing professional development for all staff will be provided.  Differentiated professional development will be provided for all staff.   Departmental Planning time to develop practice and make refinements to curriculum  Teacher Development Coach to work with teachers of 1-4 years of service to develop assessment practices Individualized Professional Development Plans for all teachers. and inter-visitations  Professional development offered to teachers from eh Borough Field Support Center 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Provide regular cycles of feedback to improve pedagogy, Individual teacher, and school-wide Professional Development Plans  Departmental Planning time each week to revise curriculum, analyze student work, and plan collaboratively  In-house and Centrally Based Professional Development on implementing strategies for Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners In-house Professional Development on using assessment and data to drive instruction and providing descriptive feedback to students   Professional Development for Math Teachers on implementation of Socratic Seminar and Professional Time to revise/refine GO MATH curriculum  Principal Conferences with District Support Staff  District Professional Development for Administrators  Teacher Development Coach focusing on 3d. 2  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  UFT Professional Development Committee  UFT MOSL Committee  PLC's focused on needs assessment  TDC PD differentiated to meet the needs of participants 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 3  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 201,228 0 12,366 0 2,800,368 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 4  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Robert F. Kennedy Intermediate School 250 , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A - the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Robert F. Kennedy Intermediate School 250 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 6  The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under ESSA schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    7  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [Robert F. Kennedy 250] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, ESSA Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA Act; 8  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships    conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by:   creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 9   sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the NESSA requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 0  1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3 2 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Learning a new language can be a difficult task. Our after school English Language Club is a great way for students to improve their English skills through the playing of various games. The Club will meet every Wednesday after school from 2:05 pm to 3:05 pm. In our club, we will play a variety of games which will help students gain vocabulary and practice various skills (speaking, writing, listening, and reading) with other students who are also learning the language. The games will range from traditional board games that practice the learning and spelling of words, theatre games where the students act out real life scenarios, and listening games revolved around music. Some of the benefits of playing games to learn a new language is that the games are entertaining, and they encourage students to interact and communicate. Also, games create a meaningful context for language use and are not stressful making the acquisition of language more possible. This program targets all entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding level students in grades 6-8. The materials they will utilize are art supplies, board games, ENL board games such as vocabulary volleyball, and Grammar Jeopardy as well as online games. This program will begin as soon as funds are available and will end at the end of the school year. We will have one TESOL/ESL certified teacher running this program. A student's home language is very important when they are learning a new language. Therefore, promoting the use of their native language in these programs can be beneficial. As for higher level ELLs/MLLs, Expanding and Transitioning level students, will have the opportunity to participate in an after school Book Club on Thursday and Fridays from 2:05-3:05. This club will allow students to practice their speaking and listening skills as they read books on their reading level and that are high interest. A part from discussing the literary themes, characters and topics within their books, students will also create projects such as dioramas, board games, and Powerpoints. The Writing projects will include the creation of writing pieces such as letters to authors and/or characters, book reviews and alternate endings to texts. Student choice in authors, topics and young adult novels will allow for a more engaging discussion and book club. We provide novels or picture dictionaries in native languages such as Spanish, Chinese, Urdu. We allow students to write in their home language and as they become more comfortable they can start to add the English language. Last, we will continue our ELL Saturday Academy from 9am-12pm. Our ELL Saturday Academy is designed to increase English Language proficiency and academic achievement. The environment will allow the students to feel comfortable in acquiring English language skills for the newcomers. This will be a supplemental program to enhance ELL's/MLL's critical thinking skills, increase their fluency, articulation, and assist them will increasing their writing 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information proficiency to help them improve academic performance. The students will be grouped by their NYSESLAT proficiency levels Entering / Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding. The program usually is for fourteen sessions. Each session is three hours long. The first two hours will focus on NYSESLAT based instruction while the third hour will focus on ELA transitioning instruction. The language of instruction is English as we are preparing them to increase their language acquisition skills. Students will be able to use translation devices and glossaries if needed. Tentatively this program will begin in December 2018 and run until May 2019. We will have two licensed ESL teachers and one licensed ELA teacher for this program. English language material will be purchased for this program. A supervisor will be hired for the duration to oversee the Title III as it is the only program that is running at that time. Furthermore, the NYSESLAT based instruction focuses on the four domains of language: Listening, Speaking, reading and writing. The workbooks that are purchased are the "FINISH LINE FOR NEW YORK ELLS" that have lessons that tie around a central theme. These materials are supplemental and only used during Saturday Academy. The ELA teacher pushes in during the ELA transitioning hour. Records are maintained by the assistant principal every Saturday where attendance is taken. The secretary keeps a file of the program notification in the parents language and the attendance in the main office. These three programs that will be in place during the 2018-2019 school year will increase their proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT and ELA state exams. In the past three years our students made huge gains on the ELA state exams as well as huge growth gains on the NYSESLAT state exam. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL teachers will offer a PD informing the staff about the Blueprint for the ELLs. They will receive intensive training from the BFSC, individualized online programs and learn how to implement the program and use it to promote language acquisition, reading comprehension, vocabulary, and writing proficiency for English language learners. In addition, our ESL teachers have received professional development on strategies for ELLs/MLLs and the New Generation Standards as well Advance Literacy. Furthermore, the combination of components, strategies, and performance assessment tools has been arranged in a framework to help the ELLs/MLLs meet the demands of the New Generation Standards. ENL teachers will continue to receive PDs for the ELLs/MLLs offered by the Queens North BFSC. ENL teachers will be pushing into content area classes and through the collaboration with the content area teacher's observation will be made for best practices. In addition, on going professional development is essential to build a community of professional learners to improve 4  Part C: Professional Development pedagogy and best practices which will result to positive student (ELLs, Former ELLs and Non ELLs) outcomes. These Professional development programs will make teachers aware of what the students need. Also, the PDs will positively impact the progress of ELLs/MLLs by closing the achievement gap and preparing the ELLs/MLLs for academic success. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents will receive workshops throughout the school year, such as ELA/Math family night, Science family night, Social Studies family night, Cultural Night (a night to celebrate the diverse cultures of our school through food, presentations, and traditional clothing and dance and Kids at Hope Events. Each of these family nights will present parents with practical strategies that they can use at home with their children to accelerate language acquisition and achievement for ELLS. Also to build a stronger school community made up of school staff, students and parents we hosted The Kids at Hope Events such as Ace of Hearts Night where students presented awards to their parents. In addition, we had an Affirmation Flag Event where parents and children created flags with positive messages for the future. Parents will also receive progress reports demonstrating their child’s progress. In addition, teachers will continue to call home and meet with parents to share best practices with them to assist in increasing their child’s academic success. Pupil path and Class DoJo will be used as an ongoing means of communication to parents to monitor progress. In addition, NYSESLAT Family Night will inform our parents about the NYSESLAT and how it measures the progress of English language learners. Also, they will learn what they can you to help their children meet the challenges of the NYSESLAT. The overview of the NYSESLAT will be on a brochure that already has translated versions. Last, we have three staff member on hand to translate the content for the parents into; Chinese , Spanish and Russian. We will also utilize the translation and interpretation services to meet the communication needs of the parents. Parents will be invited to these events using our monthly calendar of events and letters sent home via backpack. We will have annual meeting with the parents or guardians of English language learners, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. These meeting will be conducted by the ENL certified teachers. Newsletters will be distributed for parents to give them the opportunity to conference with teachers. We are looking to create a Saturday Adult ENL where the parents can learn the English language from a certified TESOL and or ELA teacher. 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 16 weeks/3hrs per teacher/3 teachers and 1 administrator Saturday Academey for ELL's Beginiing late October 2018 and ending April 2019 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $3,975 Administration per-session $6,905 per-session teachers Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $1,486 12,366 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name Robert F. Kennedy Middle School Borough Queens School Number 250 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tara Mrwik Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elena Kokoronis Teacher/Subject Area Brian Johnson / Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Sean McNamara/ ELA Related-Service Provider Alexis Kopatsis Superintendent Danielle Dimango Assistant Principal Ari Kapoutsos Coach type here School Counselor Jennifer Rodriguez-Diaz Parent Kathrine Ross-Mercado Parent Coordinator Karen Eitelberg Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) Angela Debellis / ENL Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 7  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 398 Total number of ELLs 67 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.83% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELL students, our school uses a variety of assessments to guide instructional planning. For our current and former ELLs we use the STAR Reading Online Program. The STAR assessments help our staff monitor students’ growing literacy skills and students’ progress toward becoming independent readers. This program offers individualized reading levels and lexile levels. The data retrieved from this program enables our teachers to better match students with content that will both engage and challenge them in the level at which they learn best. This data provides information where our teachers are able to focus on differentiated and guided instruction. In addition, we are assessing our students non ficiton reading levels through Achieve 3000. 8  In addition, we use data reports from summative assessments such as the MOSL NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math exams to evaluate their strengths and weaknesses in order to improve student achievement and for teachers to incorporate the weakest skills and strategies in their differentiated daily lessons and instruction. These assessments measure the students’ progress in English language proficiency. Last, formative assessments such as on demand writing and teacher generated pre, interim, and post assessments are used to evaluate our students’ strengths and weaknesses in English language development and serve them as a resource to help plan individual and group instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? During the PLC designated time, the data is analyzed on a ongoing basis. We identify a focus and work towards that focus in a 4 to 6 week cycle. During common planning we bring student work and analyze the data as a department. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? As we consistently analyze data from our ELL population, we continue to make curriculum modifications based on best practice. We analyze results from the NYSESLAT using the "RLAT" that details their scores three consecutive years and the "EDAT" (ELL Data Analysis Tool). In addition, data is also retrieved from the NYSITELL. During the 2016-2017 school year. we did not use the ELL periodic assessments. However, they have been ordered for the 2017-2018 school year and will be used to assess the ELLs progress. Data from our progress report is analyzed to target our bottom third ELLs. In addition, we analyze data from the MOSLs , on demand assessments (pre, interim and post) and incorporate small group instruction to target the weaknesses by modeling the strategy through the use of scaffolds and then have the students use the strategy independently in order to produce growth and improvement for the upcoming ELA and MATH state test. Furthermore, to meet AYP for our ELLs, we will continue our Saturday Academy to target our ELLs and give instruction that will promote growth on the NYSESLAT. Saturday Academy is held for a twenty week /three hour duration, where the ELLs here receive additional help to increase their reading, writing, listening and speaking skills. During our Saturday Academy all ELLs are placed in three classes. All entering levels are grouped together in one class. All emerging and transitioning levels are grouped together in another class and the expanding levels are placed together. All three levels are exposed to listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Also, there is an ELA teacher that sees all three groups and teaching them strategies that they will need for the state ELA exam. For the past three years that we have incorporated this Saturday Academy, we have seem growth and improvement on the ELA and NYSESLAT exams as well as classroom assessments. Therefore, we will continue to ensure student growth on the ELA and MATH state exams by offering ELA/MATH/ELL Invertention Academy after school twice a week for one hour and Saturday's for three hours. If scheduling permits, we will continue to offer Academic Intervention Services for the ELLs so that they practice the skills they will need for the State Exams (ELA, MATH, NYSESLAT). We are also continuing to work closely with the City of New York Child Center that is based in our school building to provide ESL classes to our newcomers ( 0-1 year), where they will receive vocabulary and grammar lessons. They will also be exposed to speaking, reading, writing and listening skills. To conclude, the aforementioned programs have been successful because based on our 2016 progress report compared to the 2015 Progress report improvement was successful for our ELLs in ELA. Even though our bottom third consists of some ELLs, the 9  percentiles have increased. Based on the data of the RLAT, on the NYSESLAT, students have made tremendous gains or continue an incline of growth in the four skills. Also, the success of our programs for ELLs is evaluated throughout the year through the use of teacher made assessments (formative) and the (summative) ELL interim assessment. A final assessment is made at the end of the year with the NYSESLAT. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As stated in the ELL Policy and Reference Guide, a support service such as AIS is provided for each English language learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment. The following structures are in place to address interventions: -AIS through content area. -A Saturday Academy is offered to all ELLs. -ELA and Math After school Intervention is offered to the lower level ELLs. -After school English language Game club is offered to the lower level ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] This does not apply because we are a junior high school grades 6-8. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns that are revealed across the proficiency levels on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT are as follows: First, students are more proficient in listening and speaking than in reading and writing across all grades. Secondly, the students fall more in the entering (former beginner) and expanding (former advance) levels as opposed to the emerging and transitioning ( former intermediate) level. Third, with the new changes to the state tests in order to be aligned with the Common Core State Standards, there is a decline in reading and writing that occurred between 2012 and 2013. However, as of 2014 there has been a slight variable increase in their reading and writing as per their raw scores. As of 2016, data that was analyzed (2015 &2016) using the EDAT Tool that consisted a total of 67 current ELLs, shows there was a 76 % increase in the raw score of the reading subtest. There was an 84% increase in the raw score of the writing subtest, 87% increase in the raw score of the listening subtest and 94% increase in the raw score of the speaking subtest. As for the ELA state exam there was an 80% growth increase within their proficiency level. Finally, as of Gains were made on the online reading program.Holistically, as per the iReady assessments, the Ells made significant gains with citing textual evidence and reading closely to determine an inference. As of 2017, data that was analyzed usign the EDAT tool consisted of a total of 68 ELLs show an increase to the expanding proficiency level and an increase in the reading subset. As for the ELA, there was an increase of level 2s from level 1s in the eighth grade. In Addition, for the Math states test, there was an 15% increase in Level 4s for students with one year or less in the US. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 0  To build their reading and writing proficiency we have Leveled libraries, Star- an online reading program, and supplemental leveled texts. As of 2017-2018, we are implementing disciplinary literacy which will foster literacy development across content areas and Achieve3000 online reading program. The Achieve3000 program is utilized throughout all content areas. As per the level sets on Achieve3000 and Stars Assessment results each student is place in a group per lexile level for Book Club and Achieve3000. The students are able to read material on their independent levels and at the same time practice skills that they are deficient accompanied by strategies. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. To ensure the achievement of high academic standards, and to accommodate the diverse needs of ELLs, IS 250 continues to provide rigorous standards-based instruction in a variety of learning environments by certified ENL teachers. Students are placed in a ELA/ENL class and they are taught in English using ESL methodologies. The certified ELA and ENL teachers target the skills as determined by their NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores. The classes across the grade spans are heterogeneous. As per the CR Part 154, we have a Freestanding ENL Program because it is the parents first choice on the program selection survey and we currently do not have 15 LEP students with the same native language which is other than English to create a bilingual education program. Our freestanding ENL program is taught as a co-teaching model. Therefore, the ELA teacher and ENL teacher are co-teaching. This co-teaching model is composed of two components: a language arts instructional component and a content area instructional component. The language arts instructional component is delivered through instruction in ELA and ENL with the use of translated version where applicable, bilingual glossaries, electronic pocket dictionaries. The content area instructional component is delivered through instruction in English and ESL methodologies and the ELLs are of mixed proficiency levels. ELA has a Co-teaching model, on each grade level, where we either team teach or parallel teach. Co-teaching is by an ENL certified teacher and a ELA content area teacher. All mandated units of ENL instruction are currently being met. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated instruction either in ELA, Social Studies, Math and/or Science. Currently, we do have Stand-Alone ENL Instruction and will continue with this program. We are using the literacy units and lesson plans from NYC DOE educator resources website. We understand that the Stand-Alone ENL is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. It delivered by a certified ENL teacher. A student is not receiving stand-alone ENL in lieu of core content area instruction. Standalone is three times out of the week for a total of 180 minutes. The Entering and Emerging students have a designated classroom during Stand-Alone. 1  To accelerate achievement for ELLs we have implemented thematic curriculum with heterogeneous groups of ELLs that integrate academic language development through TIER I, II, III word walls and literacy in the content areas. Flexible grouping of ELLs that looped with the same ENL teacher allow for the teacher to increase their knowledge about a child’s intellectual strengths and weaknesses. Also, it fosters long term teacher-student relationships that encourages thinking, risk-taking, and involvement. Extended learning through technology. The schedule below is an example of an transitioning student receiving 2 units of mandated ENL instruction using the CO-Teaching Model: 8th Grade Per 1 Per 2 Per 3 Per 4 Per 5 Per 6 Per 7 Per 8 Monday ELA/ENL ELA/ENL Math Math LUNCH PE SS Science Tuesday ELA/ENL Spanish Art SS LUNCH Science Math Math Wednesday Advisory SS ELA/ENL ELA/ENL LUNCH PE Math Science Thursday PE ELA/ENL ELA/ENL Math LUNCH Science SS Art Friday SS Spanish ELA/ENL Science LUNCH Health Math Math Our sixth, seventh and eighth grade ELLs and ELLs/SWDs are receiving their full mandated units of ENL through the Co-teaching model as well with mixed proficiency levels. As per the NYC State Education Department all special education students who have not tested out of the NYSESLAT are entitled and are receiving ENL services. A pull out, self-contained, collaborative and departmentalized organization model does not apply. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL is delivered the following way: ENTERING Level: 360 minutes - 8 periods a week: 4 periods of ELA/ENL / 4 periods of Standalone EMERGING Level: 360 minutes - 8 periods a week: 4 periods of ELA/ENL / 4 Periods of Standalone TRANSITIONING Level: 180 minutes - 4 periods a week of ELA/ ENL ADVANCED Level: 180 minutes - 4 periods a week of ELA/ENL COMMANDING Level: 90 minutes - 2 period a week (preferably a block period and in one or more content area ) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As stated in the previous question, the co-teaching model is composed of two components: a language arts instructional component and a content area instructional component. The language arts instructional component is delivered through instruction in ELA and ENL with the use of translated version where applicable, bilingual glossaries, electronic pocket 2  dictionaries. The content area instructional component is delivered through instruction in English and ENL methodologies. Instructional strategies that are used in the program are the following: Guided Reading, Thematic Planning, Small Group Instruction, Reading and Writing Conferences, Scaffolding, Running Records, Whole Language and Balanced Literacy. In addition, modifications of classroom tests, pictures and visual aids, manipulations and Books on Tape are provided and implemented. All students are served by an ENL teacher through collaborative co-teaching model. ENL teachers push-in during literacy and Social Studies periods. The general education teacher and ENL teacher work as a team to plan lessons and discuss best practices and strategies for their ELLs. ENL , Special Education, and General Education teachers meet during Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) to analyze student work and plan effectively. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Most classrooms are equipped with in utilizing bilingual books, glossaries and dictionaries. SIFE, Newcomers, ELLs 4-6 years and Long term ELLS are placed in small groups for differentiated instruction. All instruction is standard-based incorporating the four modalities of language. Reciprocal Teaching is incorporating throughout the different levels. NEWS ELA is also incorporated in the instruction and articles and questions are printed out in Spanish and English. In addition, Google Translate is used to translate vocabulary words and tasks in the students' home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status For all subgroups, we revise on an ongoing basis our curriculum and lessons to create pathways for success through learning, language and literacy. We offer students scaffolds but not to limit their learning with the scaffolds. We use lessons that are on the NYC DOE website designed for SIFE students. In addition, there are lessons that are being improvised by ENGAGE that are designed for ELLs that we have incorporate in our lessons from the website: https://www.engageny.org/resource/new-york-state-bilingual-common-core-initiative Tier II Intervention is applied in the classroom and Academic Intervention is placed after school. Read Alouds are incorporated in the lessons. Also, Academic Interventions Services are embedded in the students' schedules. a. SIFE: Students: respond to the questions that are modeled by the teacher and practiced in the partner discussions. Videos are incorporated in the lessons. Regular use of visuals. Common native language grouping. b. Newcomer: are exposed to sight words and have scaffolds such as cue cards. Modified assignments based on proficiency levels. Adapted tasks for different proficiency levels. Use of graphic organizers. c. Developing: Students build their vocabulary knowledge through lexical arrays. Using the modality in which the student is most deficient and incorporating it in the instruction. d. Long Term: After school ELA/MATH Intervention is in place for long term ELLs. Student choice in any educational/academic supports. Use of graphic organizers e. Former ELLs receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction. Use of graphic organizers and emphasis on academic vocabulary. All ELLs and former ELLs for up to two years after testing out are eligible for ELL testing accommodations, in addition to 3  any accommodations on their IEPs or 504 Plans, if applicable. We determine which accommodations are most suitable and beneficial and will maximize the potential for achievement on all exams for each ELL at the beginning of the school year. ELLs are entitled to using those accommodations for most assessments, including those that are teacher-made and State-mandated. ELLs are not entitled to ELL testing accommodations on the NYSESLAT. Testing accommodations for ELL students on the NYS ELA and content-area assessments include the following: • Time extension (all exams): Schools may extend the test time for ELL students on NYS ELA and content-area assessments and on Regents examinations. Principals may use any reasonable extensions, such as "time and a half" (the required testing time plus half that amount), in accordance with their best judgment about the needs of the ELL students. Principals should consult with the student's classroom teacher in making these determinations. However, there are no time limits. • Separate location (all exams): Schools are encouraged to provide optimal testing environments and facilities for ELL students. NYS assessments may be administered to ELLs individually or in small groups in a separate location. • Bilingual dictionaries and/or glossaries: ELLs may use bilingual glossaries when taking State examinations in all subjects except languages other than English exams (LOTE). The bilingual dictionaries and glossaries provide only direct one-to-one translations of words. ELA Glossaries exist in the following lanaguages: French, Haitian Creole, Hindi, Punjabi, Spanish from the following site: http://steinhardt.nyu.edu/metrocenter/center/technical_assistance/program/language_rbern/resources/glossary • Simultaneous use of English and alternative language editions are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. For state examinations for which SED provides written translations, ELLs may use both English and an alternative language edition of the test simultaneously and the students are instructed to record all of their responses in only one language. • Oral translations for low incidence languages are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. Our school provides our ELL students with an oral translation of a state examination when there is no translated edition provided by SED. All translations are oral and direct translations of the English editions. Written translations are not allowed and no clarifications or explanations are provided. Translators receive copies of the English edition of the tests one hour prior to administration. • Writing responses in the home language are not allowed for English Language Arts examinations. ELL students making use of alternative language editions or of oral translations of state examinations may write their responses to the open-ended question in their home languages. Scoring the tests is the responsibility of the school. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our curriculum uses the Expeditionary Learning Modules and for accelerated achievement teachers focus on vocabulary such as "Big idea" words as they relate to lesson concepts, high-frequency academic words, high-use content-specific words, and words to engage in literate discourse about a topic. The vocabulary words are 5 to 7 words per lesson and teachers provide examples of the target words within the context of the lesson. In addition, teachers teach word relationships, such as cognates, synonyms, antonyms, multiple meanings, roots, and etc. Finally, the vocabulary words are also used in their discussion allowing the students to be exposed to the target words multiple times. Another strategy to accelerate achievement is through scaffolds, such as Modeling, activating and bridging prior knowledge and/or experiences using graphic organizers, such as anticipatory guides, extended anticipatory guide, semantic maps, interviews, picture walk discussion protocols, think-pair-share, and KWL. Also, Text representation, metacognitive development such as self assessment, think aloud, asking clarifying questions, using a rubric for self evaluation. Another strategy is the use of their native language through technology, human resources, native language materials and flexible grouping.Finally, to accelerate achievement in writing at the beginning level, students can copy or fill in the blanks within a template or writing frame, and they can write sentences or brief paragraphs that eventually can get pieced together to create a grade appropriate essay. Therefore, the standards that are taught, are at grade level, however, the independent supplemental nonfiction and fiction 4  reading materials are based on the students independent reading level. The anchor texts are at grade level. Graphic Organizers are given to assist the students with independent and instructional reading material. Reciprocal Teaching is implementing as well in all lessons. The reading material that is provided during Reciprocal Teaching is nonfiction and fiction that include different genres from different authors. Also, Literacy circles will be introduced in September 2017. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? In September all staff reviews the IEPs of all the students they have enrolled in their classes and sign the 408b form. ELL-SWDs are placed in a ICT classroom where the ELA teacher, Special Education teacher and the ENL teacher are present. Literacy circles will be incorporated in the lesson. Small group instruction during a 90 minute block will focus on reading, vocabulary, writing, grammar, listening and speaking strategies that are data driven. Students rotate throughout the activities. Starting next September, students will be engaged in Literacy Circles in which they will read, analyze and discuss through shared and guided reading literature that they choose based on their reading lexile level. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Using data driven assessments from summative assessments (ELA, MATH, Pre and Post Assessments in English, Math, Science and Social Studies, Interim Assessments, and NYSESLAT) ELLs as well as Former ELLs will be invited to enroll in an after school literacy program for enrichment and to improve the skills they are lacking in ELA and Math. Also, struggling students will receive academic intervention service. In the past, Title III money was allocated and an intervention academy was commenced and lasted for five months. This academy will continue to be opened to level 1's, ELLs and students with disabilities. In the near future, ELL students will continue to be enrolled in an after school program that targets their needs to reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT. The ELA targeted interventions include on demand writing curriculum, literature circles aligned with their reading levels based on lexile levels, leveled libraries, various picture books, books on tape, multi-cultural levels libraries, translated dictionaries, bilingual books, ExC-ELL strategies and technology (promethean boards, laptops, ipads). The Math targeted interventions include Impact Math textbooks, charts, graphs, rulers and other visual displays, bilingual content glossaries ExC-ELL strategies and technology such as promethean and laptops. The Science targeted interventions include technology (promethean, laptops), ExC-ELL strategies, lab manipulatives and equipment, bilingual content glossaries, common core libraries, content based classroom libraries and ExC-ELL strategies. The Social Studies targeted interventions include technology once again, newspapers, common core libraries, content based libraries, bilingual content glossaries, ExC-ELL strategies, non fiction texts, level set libraries and various Atlases. All interventions targets all proficiency levels of ELLs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are implementing literacy circles in ELA and Go MATH. We will continue to revise to make it conducive to our students' needs. Also, we are incorporating Socratic seminars in the ELA/ENL and Math classes. Finally, content circles will be used for discussion modeling our restorative circles. These new implementations will improve the listening, speaking, reading and writing skills of our ELLs because they will receive scaffolds and all material will be on their independent reading levels. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? This does not apply because no bilingual program was opened and then closed. 5  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs within our school are offered the same instructional program as their general education peers. With Title I and III funds our ELLs and former ELLs will also be provided with the opportunity of the After School Intervention Academy that targets ELA/ ENL and Math Skills. Teachers will provide ENL/Math instruction, utilizing researched based best practices in small group settings. Monthly assessments will be administered to monitor student growth and to plan further instruction. Progress reports will also be generated and discussed with the parents. Finally, depending on future funding additional programs may be included as well. Extracurricular activities include four CHAMPS sports which are offered to all students who would like to participate. Any interested participants are considered for the program and in such activities. There are also many after school clubs: English Language Game Club, Art Club, Lego Club, MAGMA club (Science & Magic) etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Toolkits identifying scaffolding for ELLs are included in all curriculum. Advance and intermediate level ELLs receive the same instructional material and resources as general education students. Scaffolds are in place along with visuals. Newcomers use modified materials on their reading level and visuals are used. Teachers modify lessons using ENL strategies to make the standard based curriculum more accessible for ELLs. The materials are based on their reading levels per the results of the lexile level. Therefore, technology based online programs are used to support the ELLs. Newcomers use modified materials on their reading level and visuals are used. Teachers modify lessons using ENL strategies to make the standard based curriculum more accessible for ELLs. Teachers incorporate promethean interactive lessons. Also, instructional technology such as IPad mobile classroom are used to support the ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is delivered through the use of bilingual libraries, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. Texts that are available in a native language are also used. Native language state exams are also available. In addition, we have multiple staff members who speak a second language. ELLs who were considred "newcomers" are instructed with an intense vocabulary and grammar rich curriculum. A solid reading and writing components aligned with the ENL standards, Common Core ELA standards are incorporated in the lessons. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels because the curriculum is aligned to the Common Core and three units of study are the Expeditionary Learning Modules from the city that includes ELLs and their supports. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? No Shared Building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor reach out to our feeder schools and invite them to come meet the staff during open house and have a tour of the building to become familiar with our academic programs. Throughout the year we 6  outreach through meetings such as the orientation, P/T conferences and extended conferences. In addition, our Guidance Counselor, Mrs. Rodriguez-Diaz, has advisory with the entire sixth grade. This advisory is held once a week for a period, where they learn about transitioning to the middle school level, life skills and safety. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The only language elective offered to seventh and eighth grade ELLs is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? This does not apply because we do not have dual language programs. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The common branch teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, ENL teachers, Special education teachers will continued to be trained in using data to drive instruction and goal settings. Professional development will be provided based on Danielson's Framework Domain 3b: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques to challenge ALL students including ELLs to high cognitive questions and have high levels of student participation in discussion targeting ALL students. The list of PDs offered is ongoing for the schoolyear 2017-2018. During the summer of 2017, the ENL teacher, Ms. Debellis, attended the ELL Teacher Summer Institute (August 2017) professional learning offered by Queens North BFSC. Monthly Principal Meetings are held to address the needs of diverse learners. They will be going to PDs that are offered by DELL workshops. The professional development will help our staff support literacy development and explore as well as promote pragmatic approaches to address the needs of our ELLs and help the ELLs rise to the challenges of complex texts 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating 7  language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours must be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. These PDs will support teachers in delivering Common-Core aligned instruction by modeling scaffolds as a way to support students who struggle with language acquisition. Since we have Sixth grade orientation, high school orientation, high school night , sixth and eighth grade advisory, auditorium periods to assist with transiting and articulation,and content family night staff will be provided with ELL training throughout the school year from PLCs to provide them with information such as the "Blueprint For ELLS" and any information pertaining to the ELLS in the building. In addition, to assist all ELLs, all staff members are given resources such as bilingual dictionaries for their classrooms. Also, they are notified of their current, former and transitioned ELLs by the ENL coordinator. For our 8th grade students who will be articulating to High School our guidance counselor meets with each class to explain the application process. The guidance counselor also shows the ELLs how to identify schools that have the programs they need and the guidance counselor reviews each application to ensure that the schools they are applying to have the ENL program they need. In addition, our guidance counselor receives professional development the as the rest of the staff. She is also present when we have our weekly data inquiry meetings and analyzing the data to determine good teaching practices. ELL training that the staff will be receiving is through DELLs and QPN workshops that will be ongoing throughout the school year for all staff members. Guidance Counselor received training in articulation. Also, registered to attend ELL Overview for School Counselors on 11/15/17 In the upcoming school year, all PDs that the ENL teachers receive will be turn keyed. In addition, Co teachers will be going on ELL PDs together. Staff member will turn key the information during our designated PLC on Mondays. 4 ELA Teachers : Struggling Readers: Toolkit of Strategies 10/27/17, 11/15,17, 12/15/17 2 ELA/CoTeachers: Literacy Instruction in ICT classroom: 10/27/17 1 Social Studies Teacher: Diifferentiated instruction:Meet the needs of all students 10/17/17, 11/15/17, 12/15/17 1 ENL: Maryann Cuchiarra (ELLs) 9/28/17 ENL Pathways to Success: Advanded Literacy for ELLs (6-12) 10/18, 10/19 ENL ELL Liaison Meeting (D25) 10/20/17, 1//18,3/22/18,6/13/18 ENL ELL Data Analysis Training 11/6/17 ELA: Scaffolding Writing for ELLs 11/20/17, 11/21/17 2 Social Studies Teachers: Using Technology to enhance ELLS 11/30/17 ENL Teachers: Strategic Formative Assessment of ELLs 11/29/17 1 Art Teacher: Using the Arts including technology to enhance Academic Success for ELLs 12/14/17 Attendance is kept on file on school premises by the Pupil Accounting Secretary as well as agendas. Also, there is a tracking "Teacher Professional Development 2017-2018 " chart available on premises with a focus on best practices for co-8  teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. All PD registration confirmations are emailed to each staff member. Each member completes the DOE OP 201 Form as well. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? On-going parent orientations are held throughout the school year to inform parents of new admits about the program options for English Language Learners and for parents who were unable to watch the parent orientation video during the registration process. In addition, parents of English Language Learners in our school are invited to a variety of school meetings to keep them informed of the school’s curriculum, the expectations of student progress and various services and programs available to English Language Learners. Also, in the beginning of the school year, a "Back to School" night is held where all parents are invited and an ELL parent orientation is held for the families of those students who are determined eligible for ENL services. It is open to any family member who wishes to attend. The ENL teacher awaits parents so she can explain how the ENL program runs and what expectations are held for the growth of the ELL students. Agendas and sign in sheets are present to keep records. Finally, phone calls are made and letters are sent home in the parents' preferred language. Records are kept by sign in sheets. During the 2017-2018 school year, we will be making arrangements to offer additional parent meetings for any incoming Elementary ELL student that does not have or is missing the necessary ELL forms (such as a Parent Selection Survey) in their cumulative file. At this meeting, a translator will be present, if needed, to watch the video and complete a new Parent Selection Survey Form since an original is not on file. The parents will also be informed about the ELL Transfer Process. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have a group of ELL parents on the PTA who are proficient in English that reach out to other ELL parents. The Parent Coordinator creates a calendar of school events, key testing and event dates. The PC sends any school letters to the translation unit two weeks prior to get translated in the parents' preferred language. Our PC creates a welcoming school environment for parents where she sends a welcome letter to parents with her contact information and hours. The PC post signs, displays bulletin boards at the school entrance. Also, the PC hosts PTA meeting and Student of the Month once a month. Parents of ELLs are informed about the 45 Day Appeal and the ELL Transfer Request process during Parent Orientation. They are also informed about Skedula and Dojo. . In order for our school to increase home support, we offer regular communication from the staff through phone calls, emails, and hand written notes with the use of the L1 of the families whenever possible. Parents are informed of any behaviors positive or negative. To educate parents we provide resources such as the "How to get involved" 'English Language Learners brochure from the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support website. We also have questions translated for the parents to ask our teachers during parent conferences. All our resources are translated in many different languages.. We schedule meeting with the parents or guardians of English language learners, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. We record attendance using existing procedures. 9  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. This is some additional information on how we identify our ELLs: To identify English Language Learners in our school, the following is carried out to ensure proper placement. First and foremost, we have a team in place which handles the registration and orientation process with all the necessary documentation. This team includes the principal, ENL coordinator/teacher, people accounting secretary and the parent coordinator. Our parent coordinator welcomes the new registrants and is one of the team members that determines whether a translator will be needed during the registration process. When a parent comes in with his/her child and neither is able to speak in English or comes from another country and is able to converse in English to some extent, the ENL teacher, Ms. Kokoronis is notified and is always requested to be present during the registration process. Ms. Kokoronis and /or Ms.Debellis conducts an interview and looks at the report card grades. If a translator is needed, one of our mulitlingual staff members (para professionals, classroom teachers, psychologist, and etc.) is requested to be present. During the registration process, all parents are given the parents' preferred language form for school communications, and the Home Language Identification Survey in their native language by the ENL Coordinator. The Parent Program Selection Survey is given to the parents by the ENL teacher, Ms. Kokoronis in their native language and an interview is conducted as well. Once again, if a translator is needed, one of our multi-lingual staff members is requested to be present through this process. In addition, Ms. Kokoronis, the ENL coordinator/teacher shows the parent orientation video and hands out the Parent Survey and Program Selection form to the parents to complete and hand back immediately. The ENL coordinator, or a trained pedagogue is present while the HLIS is completed. The HLIS is given to any student that comes from a private school, out of state and/or abroad. If a student comes from a private school and/or out of state, an informal oral interview is performed by the ENL coordinator to confirm that the new admit does not speak a second language. Next, a letter is attached to the HLIS and "NO" is indicated on the HLIS and indicated on ATS by the people accounting secretary. No HLIS is given to a student who has been in a DOE public school. If a HLIS is not on file from a previous school, the home language is taken from the biographical information on ATS. Our ENL coordinator/teacher, reviews the HLIS and it is the first form used to identify and determine eligibility for testing. Once the students have been identified, they are then administered the NYSITELL by the ENL coordinator/teacher within ten days of their enrollment or twenty days if they are ELLs and SWDs. The NYSITELL answer documents are printed from the ITEL screen using the RLBA screen. If a student comes from a Spanish speaking background Spanish LAB is administered to ELLs whose home language is Spanish and did not meet the Proficient level on the NYSITELL. The Spanish LAB-R is administered by the Foreign Language teacher (Spanish teacher) or the trained para professional who speaks Spanish with the ENL teacher present. In additon, the RLER is also printed out and used to keep track of students that need to be tested for the NYSITELL and the RLAB is used for placement. Finally, the NYSESLAT scores from the RLAT and RNMR are used to determine which students are entitlement per exam or have passed/tested out. For students that have tested out, the ENL teacher creates a list of all transitioned/former ELLs for up to two school years immediately after they have achieved proficiency on the NYSESLAT that are eligible for testing accommodations and gives a copy to each staff member. All enrolled students have a copy of their exam history (REXH) printed out by the pupil accounting secretary and placed in their cumulative file and are checked by the ENL coordinator/teacher to confirm if any previous NYSESLAT scores exist. Also, a bilingual program is unavailable because we do not have 15 students of the same home language on two consecutive grades. 0  1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tara Mrwik, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Robert F. Kennedy Middle Schoo School DBN: 25Q250 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tara Mrwik Title Principal 1Ari Kapoutsos Assistant Principal Karen Eitelberg Parent Coordinator 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ENL Teacher Other 10/27/17 Related Services Other Elena Kokoronis 10/27/17 Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/27/17 10/27/17 10/27/17 Kathrine Ross-Mercado Sean McNamara ELA Brian Johnson Special ED Jennifer Rogriduez-Diaz Angela Debellis Alexis Kopatsis ENL/Bilingual Teacher 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q250 School Name: I.S.250 Superintendent: Mrs.DiMango The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The ATS report "RAPL" can be updated regularly. a. In house created survey to all Official Teachers to determine the home language for each student. b. All written communication is sent to the DOE translation c. Emergency written communication is translated "in-house" in Spanish. All other families receive an attached form stating that if they need this information in another language to contact the school. d. All staff receives a school circular in their opening packet outlining the school and DOE policies for providing translations/interpretations services for parents. 4  e. Any notices sent via the school's phone messaging system are translated into Spanish, Chinese, Bengali, Urdu, and Russian. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish, Chinese, Urdu, Russian, Bengali, French, Tagalog, Farsi, Punjabi, Arabic, Pashto, Gujartati,and Hindi 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Information about Opne Houses, PA meetings, Content Family Nights, newletters, and information regarding ceremonies,:grauation and awards How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 5  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 1) Four parent teacher meetings -September 2015, November 2015, February 2) Content Family Nights- TBD 3) IEP meetings-ongoing 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Signs in all eight languages provided on the DOE site are conspicuously hung in the main lobby and main office. All staff has access to the DOE Translation Hotline for communication with parents. A list of staff members who speak a second language is kept in the main office for review. All written communication is sent to the DOE Translation Unit a minimum of one week prior to the proposed distribution date. Staff who speak a second language are paid at the per session rate to attend evening events to provide interpretation services. In an emergency where it is not possible to translate a document, a form is attached to the parental notification advising parents to contact the school if they need the document in another language. 6  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Learning Enviroment Survey, Parent Surceys, PTA meetings, and SLT committee 7 
