 29Q283 School Name: PREPARATORY ACADEMY FOR WRITERS: A COLLEGE BOARD SCHOOL Principal: CHARLES ANDERSON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Preparatory Academy for Writers 29Q283 342900011283 6-12 School Number (DBN): 143-10 Springfield Blvd. Springfield Gardens, NY 11413 (718) 9498405 Phone Number: (718) 5258495 Fax: Jessica Behr jbehr@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Charles Anderson Deshana Barker Inez Hawkins Giselle Granados Genevieve Jean Nicole Davis TomeekaHamilton Thompson Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: SumerArchibald Aylianna Frazier Corey Terry Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Juan Mendez Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Room 510, Flushing NY 11345 jmendez2schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 281 7577 Phone Number: 718 281 7519 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 82-01 RockawayBlvd., Queens, NY 11416 MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: ? Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Charles Anderson DeshannaBarker Inez Hawkins N/A Nicole Davis *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable TomeekaHamilton Thompson Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson SumerArchibald AyliannaFrazier Corey Terry Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/   Name Gisele Granados KidraDandridge Mark Heilbrunn MahendraSingh Genevieve Jean AnasthaciaMentis Gladys Mothersil Kenneth Gadsden Nicole Davis TomeekaHamilton Thompson Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher EhimanreEbhomielen Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our school's mission is to provide the structure and support needed socially, emotionally, and academically for all of our students to be successful. The Preparatory Academy for Writers develops students who are are authors of their own destiny.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. From 6th grade to college-level courses, learning at the Preparatory Academy for Writers is guided by the age-old truth that nothing is constant except for change. We at Writers are always improving ourselves, revising and innovating to meet the needs of our students, whether they are academic, social, or emotional. We do not have individual desks in our classrooms. Instead students sit around tables. Sitting in pairs or in groups that range from 3 to 12, our school's instructional model is designed to produce students who can work both independently and collaboratively. In fact, student voice drives much of the learning at the Preparatory Academy for Writers. Whether its a response to a challenging reading assignment, a creative journal writing, a real-world math problem, or participation in a class discussion, students are expected to engage in peer and self assessment that is honest and well-informed. Teachers typically facilitate collaborative learning and encourage problem-solving. Rarely do they teach, in the traditional sense, where note-taking and memorization are essential, but guide students to discover, research, and question. As educators, we are committed to differentiating the modes in which students develop understanding. As a result, our school has developed a unit planning template that organizes daily learning activities into three pillars of communication and learning ; reading, discussion, and, of course, writing. Every standard we teach in every content area is measured across these three categories so that layers of understanding are developed. Students read about something, discuss it within a small group, consolidate learning by writing, and then evaluate their own understanding and that of a peer through the feedback process. The process repeats with new readings, perhaps altering the order, changing the activities. Reading, writing and discussion are the keys to an education. They are essential skills that we work to strengthen because they are not simply academic skills. They are also the keys to developing character, community, and culture. Over the past few years we have taken steps to align our instructional practices and curricula in order to support social emotional learning (SEL) standards. PRIDE, our system for communicating expectations, assessing behaviors, and supporting students in their growth toward SEL goals, while still in its development, has already been key to creating a school environment that is truly unique. Partnerships with community based organizations including The Child Center of New York and Our Brothers Keeper, as well as DOE initiatives that include College Access for All, AP for All, Achieve Now Academy, and College Now support our school's vision, culture, and reputation. Writers is different. We are a small school that has something for everyone. We publish a great newspaper and an award-winning literary magazine. We have a track record for challenge students academically, with middle school students passing as many as 3 high school Regents and high school students taking as many as 10 college-level courses before they graduate. Simultaneously,, we support those struggling with skill and dedication. We also have some interesting traditions, our own schedule, and our own vibe. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In any 6th -12th grade school one can assume that there are a wide range of specific needs. We are sure to meet the needs of all of our students, including students with learning disabilities, students in temporary housing, and English language learners. We also look at other sub-groups such as 11th and 12th grade males with above an 80 on an English Regent but who haven't passed an Advanced Placement exam, or 10th graders who failed 1st period classes the previous year. Whatever the group, we design supports, adjust programs, and decide upon policies with the specific needs of students in mind. 0  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Three elements of the Framework are well developed at the Preparatory Academy for Writers. There are collaborative teachers at PAW that, day-after-day, illustrate their dedication to excellence in their classrooms and our school. In these teachers' rooms, students feel both the weight of rigorous expectations and the support of a nurturing environment. Our focus for this academic year is to better bridge the distance between classroom and kitchen table and to foster meaningful parental involvement. With a new parent coordinator and new ideas from our PTA, our focus is three-fold. First, we plan to use the tools that technology provide to make communication more convenient and consistent. Second, we will focus on aligning PTA events with school events and initiatives, making both more meaningful. Finally, we will be involving parents in our work with social emotional learning standards. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q283 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 588 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 5 5 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 2 School Composition (2017-18) 69.0% % Attendance Rate 61.4% % Reduced Lunch 1.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.5% 5.3% 0.7% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.18 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 55.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 93% 83% 87.4% 23.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 113 108 89.0% 6.6% 16.2% 88.4% 2.6% 3.1% 6 21% 6.5 31.7% N/A 91% 93% 88.5% 30% N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. What the school does well: Regular monitoring of student achievement data through benchmark assessments, student portfolios and our online gradebook results in highly accurate and timely interventions. Small, yet ongoing AIS programs and a large number of counselors and social workers ensure that struggling students or sub-groups are more likely to be successful. Middle school students attend an afterschool program for enrichment and for academic support and the majority of MS students begin 9th grade having already passed one or more Regents exams. MS proficiency levels in ELA (56%) are above State averages. Furthermore, improvements to vertical planning, curriculum and to teacher recruitment has lead to the creation of powerful learning experiences for students that are rigorous, authentic and meaningful. What we need to focus on now: Math and science classes are a focus of our 2018-2019 educational plan. We have been laying a solid mathematical foundation in the middle school. Although only 1 out of 3 students start the 6th grade proficient in math, last June 82% of our 8th graders graduated middle school having passed the Algebra Regents. However, the 9th and 10th grade passing rates are approximately 20 points lower. Similarly, Living Environment passing rates have been in the 60s or 70s for years now. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will improve the HS Algebra Regents passing rate to 80% and the Living Environment passing rate to 75% by August 2019. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will redesign our Algebra curriculum. The master schedule was created so that there will be four different teachers teaching Algebra. In teams of two, teachers will be following two different curricula. Meeting twice a week, the math department will construct units of study that pulls from both curricula and align with our school's instructional vision. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 7th -10th grade Algebra students September 2018 through June 2019 AP Behr Ms. Serrette Mr. Ebhomelien Ms. Johnson Mr. Rathjen AP Behr Ms. Serrette Mr. Ebhomelien Ms. Johnson Mr. RathjenWE 6 times (once/unit) between September 2018 and June 2019 We will use the resources provided through AP for All by the National Math and Science Institute to embed pre-AP tasks in each unit of study. All math classes We have changed the sequence and focus of the Living Environment curriculum, starting the year with an ecology unit and then framing many of the subsequent units within an ecological context. 9th and 10th grade Living Environment students. September 2018 through June 2019 AP Behr Ms. Singh We will add Wednesday afternoon and Saturday to the lunchtime support sessions that are already in place. Mr. Heilbrunn Mr. Colquhoun Ms. Davis AP Behr Ms. Singh Mr. Heilbrunn Mr. Colquhoun Ms. Davis Lunches and Wednesdays; selected students October 2018 through June 2019 Saturdays; open to all Living Environment students 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have a toolkit of online learning platforms that we are using to provide students with customized learning and support. Workshops on i-Ready, Delta Math, Edgenuity, Khan Academy, and other web-based platforms use at Writers have been planned in order to show parents how to utilize the supports we have put in place for their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Implementation of the previously mentioned action plans required the purchase of laptops, ipads, iReady licenses for each student, per session for teachers working achieve program, Academic Intervention Services and Saturday Academy. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By mid-year Scholarship Conferences in January, the math department will have co-designed the first 3 units of the 2019-2020 Algebra curriculum. Students will also sit for the January Regents, and we hope to achieve a passing rate greater than 55%. Similarly, the science department will have completed revisions to the Living Environment curriculum and will have an overall class passing rate of 80% and a lab completion rate of 85%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Measures student work through teacher team meetings, student portfolio presentations, unit assessments, and three school-wide benchmark assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? What the school does well: The students at the Preparatory Academy for Writers can always find a friendly, professional face in the Office of Student Services. Lead by an assistant principal with background in guidance, the school has a multifaceted approach to meeting the varied needs of its students. The school's advisory system is woven into its fabric; teaching social emotional learning standards, developing student portfolios, involving students in school governance, and fostering collaborative relationships. What we need to focus on now: Last year the school set up a PBIS team to embark in a two-year process to improve school culture. Aligned with the systems developed by the PBIS team, the school has aligned professional development to train teachers to be more culturally responsive pedagogues. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will improve the school's score on the New York City School Survey - Supportive Environment from 66% to 80% as it appears in the 2018-19 School Quality Guide. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Through the use of outside grants and DOE programs, we will strengthen the school's office of student services, adding a clinical social worker and youth advocate. All students grade 6-12 April 2017 through June 2019 AP Signh Ms. Chan Ms. James The Child Center of New York All students Monthly PBIS team September 2017- End June 2018 Principal Anderson AP Singh All students October 2017 through June 2019 October 2017 through June 2019 Elected students from each advisory class The PBIS team includes administrators, teachers and a parent. Ms. Gallagher Principal Anderson The school will develop a PRIDE form that utilizes NYS SEL benchmarks into a tool that teachers can use to assess students and communicate with parents. In addition we will hold monthly PRIDE events to highlight topics aligned to social emotional learning standards and teachers will use PRIDE forms and and other assessments as they incorporate SEL into each unit of study. The PBIS team with continue to attend professional development and continue to meet regularly to develop the school's The school will use the advisory structure to build a more involved student government. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The PBIS team was constructed to ensure that all stakeholders, parents, teachers, administrators and students, are invested in the system. The team meets weekly with administration in order to plan and facilitate PRIDE events and initiatives.. 7  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school has an AP of Student Services, a guidance counselor, a social workers, a full-time advisory teacher, and a full-time dean. Through grants we have partnered with the Child Center of New York to bring a full-time clinical social worker and a full-time youth advocate. Additionally, the school works with a community based organization, Our Brothers Guardian and local politicians to bring additional resources to the students at Writers. A bell schedule that features a weekly town hall and early dismissal on Wednesdays has also been important to building a supportive environment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the end of the first trimester, late November, all students will present student portfolios that will include PRIDE forms for each unit packet. Then during mid-year scholarship conferences teachers will present completed PRIDE forms customized for each unit. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In addition to the use of PRIDE forms, we have worked with The Child Center of New York to select and administer a social emotional learning assessment, Scholarcentric Success Highways; the Resilience Assessment, to all of our students two to three times a year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. What the school does well: The school has a well developed system for ensuring that while teachers have the ability to adapt and and improve instruction, all instruction is aligned to the school's instructional vision of a student-centered, differentiated classroom promoting reading, writing and discussion. What we need to work on now: Although all teachers, through the observation and feedback cycle engage in a needs assessment of sorts, those teachers who participate in the development of our PD plans through the PD committee have a particularly important role in creating a culture of continuous improvement. This year areas that our teachers would like to improve include: ● Quality of teacher-to-student and student-to-student feedback, particularly in journals ● Quality of student-facilitated discussions as guided by teacher-generated questions ● The addition of differentiated, culturally responsive texts in our social studies, science, and English curricula ● Development of authentic, rigorous, and engaging summative assessments for each unit ● The creation of social emotional learning activities and assessments to our units Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will improve the school's score on the New York City School Survey - Collaborative Teachers from 84% to 85% as it appears in the 2018-19 School Quality Guide. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams collaborate during common planning as well as professional development sessions weekly to analyze data, reflect and revise the school's professional learning plans. Implement a professional learning community using classroom inter-visitations to showcase best practices as well as provide collegial feedback. All teaching staff All teaching staff September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Teachers will build a relationship with the parents of targeted students to address, plan and reflect on student achievement including academic and social goals. 15 students per grade level 3 weeks during each trimester Academic Intervention Services, Middle school after school program and tutoring. 6th - 12th Grade October 2018 - June 2019 Administrative team Administrative team Administrative team, high school and middle school staff and parents. Administrative Team and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PTA meetings, Parental Workshops, Take Homes - Throughout the year - PTA Pres., Parent Coord. Office Personnel, Asst. Prin. Instruction, Core Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school-wide schedule has been designed to accommodate teacher collaboration and professional development on a weekly basis. Teacher per session for accreditation committee meetings and grade level team leader meetings as well as per diem for teachers to attend professional development opportunities has been set aside. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During mid-year scholarship conferences in January, administrators will confer with each teacher regarding their progress towards meeting personalized instructional and professional goals that were created during our initial planning conferences in September. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our professional development committee has constructed a brief survey to administer at the end of our own professional development sessions. Using questions created by our team as well as questions that are taken from the NYC School Survey, we will monitor progress throughout the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. What the school does well: The school's principal, who is not used to writing about himself in the third person, is a positive presence in the school. He is goal oriented and has significantly improved the school. He works long hours with great energy, perpetually trying to maintain high expectations for the students. He makes an effort to be connected with the students whether they are in the gym, in the hallways, in the classrooms or in the cafeteria and to use his position as principal to improve his students' educational experience. What we need to work on now: We look forward to every step that we take in the direction of developing curricula that includes social emotional learning, is culturally responsive, and aligns with the school's vision of how students learn best. The school's assistant principals will organize the departments and create collaboratively developed units of study that include highly effective discussion questions, rigorous reading assignments, and high quality writing tasks. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We will collaboratively create Algebra, Living Environment, and 6th-12th grade English curricula by June 2019. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). By June 2019, we will revise the 6th -12 grade ELA curricula (6 units per grade level, plus AP Lang and Lit), adding texts that can be used to teach social emotional learning benchmarks like empathy, or decision making ,etc. and adding authors from various cultural points of view. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? English Department September 2018- June 2019 AP Charles Ms. Dandridge Ms. Urena Ms. Lee Ms. Chosam Ms. Granados Ms. Tello AP Behr Ms. Serrette AP Behr Ms. Singh Mr. Heilbrunn Mr. Colquhoun Ms. Schnell Ms. Davis By June 2019, we will create a shared Algebra curriculum that includes 6 units and includes differentiated problem sets and readings, journal questions, and highly effective discussion questions. Mathematics Department September 2018- June 2019 By June 2019, we will improve our Living Environment course by revising our curriculum. Utilizing Google classroom to have students research, produce research papers and lab reports, and participate in discussion. Science Department November 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 3  PTA meetings, Parental Workshops, Take Homes - Throughout the year - PTA Pres., Parent Coord. Office Personnel, Asst. Prin. Instruction, Core Teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher leaders assist in the development of professional development as members of the PD committee. Additionally, schedules are created for scholarship conferences and per diem subs are utilized. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress will be monitored by mid-year and end-year scholarship conferences with all teachers to analyze mid year credit accumulation, classroom data and Regents scores to indicate school progress toward meeting our annual school goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship Conferences (January/June) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. What the school does well: The school hosts events, a Haunted House, a Thanksgiving Feast, a show in December, A Career Day, a College Decision Day, a several times throughout the year that promote family engagement. What we need to work on now: Our teachers do not consistently communicate academic progress to parents, often relying upon an online gradebook with which more than half of our parents are not registered. Consequently, parental involvement often occurs in response to academic or behavioral issues and is too often negative in nature. In addition, we need to organize our students' community service so that not only do our students become a resource to the community but so that community resources find their way into the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase teacher and parent participation by 100% at PTA meetings. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? With the help of a new parent coordinator we will establish grade-level parent teams for 6th through 12th grades All parents We will track Parent and student usage of Pupil Path and create incentives for parent registration. All students and parents We will support efforts by our new PTA executive board to survey parents and to develop PTA meeting dates and agenda that interest parents. PTA executive board November 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 October 2018 through June 2019 AP Singh Ms. Angus AP Singh Ms. Angus Ms. Gallagher AP Singh Ms. Angus We will coordinate community service opportunities for students that involve local elementary schools, nursing homes, shelters, and other community organizations. PTA executive board members All students September AP Singh 2018 through June 2019 Ms. Angus Ms. Gallagher Our Brothers Guardian 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Child Center of New York, Our Brothers Guardian Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  Per session is available for teachers who organize clubs that engage in community service projects. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The January PTA meeting will serve as a mid-point benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets from PTA meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students with a grade below 65, or those who have not passed the Regents exam, will receive AIS services. Students with a grade below 65, or those who have not passed the Regents exam, will receive AIS services. Students with a grade below 65, or those who have not passed the Regents exam, will receive AIS services. Students with a grade below 65, or those who have not passed the Regents exam, will receive AIS services. Students identified through an d IEP, teacher recommendation, or parent concerns will be provided counseling. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) We will use iReady or Regents based questions and documents depending upon the need. We will use iReady or Regents based questions and documents depending upon the need. We will use Regents Based documents, or required Labs, depending upon the need of the student. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) We will use small group or one-to-one tutoring by classroom teachers or qualified tutors. We will use small group or one-to-one tutoring by classroom teachers or qualified tutors. We will use small group or one-to-one tutoring by classroom teachers or qualified tutors. We will use Regents Based documents, depending upon the need of the student. We will use small group or one-to-one tutoring by classroom teachers or qualified tutors. Certified counselors, guidance counselors, school psychologist or social worker will develop a needs based service. Certified counselors, guidance counselors, school psychologist or social worker will provide one-to-one services. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) These services will be provided before school, during lunch, after school or on Saturday Regents Prep days. These services will be provided before school, during lunch, after school or on Saturday Regents Prep days. These services will be provided before school, during lunch, after school or on Saturday Regents Prep days. These services will be provided before school, during lunch, after school or on Saturday Regents Prep days. These services will be provided during the school day. 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 36 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are provided with all school supplies, uniforms and materials needed. Students meet once a week with counselor. Students are involved in community based organization, Our Brothers Guardian, which is a funded program in our school that helps students find internships and jobs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The process by which we recruit and interview teachers ensures that, not only are they Highly Qualified according to the vacancies we need to fill, but are collaborative, creative and motivated. Our very non-traditional group interview allows us to see how teachers will interact and problem-solve and since its development we have been very happy with the teachers we have hired. Teacher teams collaborate and share best practices to improve instructional strategies in all classroom settings, including ICT. Best practices are determined through ongoing data analysis and iterative inquiry that results in the reflection, reteaching, and revision of the curriculum as necessary. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The Preparatory Academy for Writers has had weekly professional development meetings since we used an SBO years ago to create a shortened school day for students every Wednesday. Now, our PD committee, along with guidance from administration develops PD based on teacher interests, aligned with instructional shifts, and in response to informal observations. Teacher teams participate in and share findings from the iterative data inquiry. Itemized analysis reports from student performance on exams and assessments aligned to the CCLS are used to identify areas of weakness. Differentiated Instruction strategies are embedded into collaborative lesson designs to meet the needs of all students. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 1  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are the decision makers and/or the developers of the all assessments others than those issues by the State. Teachers meet in common planning meetings and decide upon the appropriate professional development. Teachers are the decision makers and/or the developers of all the assessments other than those issued by the State. Teachers meet in inquiry teams to analyze data and design differentiated instructional strategies to meet the needs of all students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) X Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 237,910 X 2  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 3,567,833 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the 3  participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Preparatory Academy For Writers, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Preparatory Academy For Writers will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 6  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Preparatory Academy For Writers , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 7  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 8  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 9  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 0  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name Preparatory Academy for Writers Borough Queens School Number 283 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Charles Anderson Coach Ms. Azizi Davis ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Jacqueline Smartt Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Nichole Rivero/ Spanish EN Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Stephanie Tello/ English Related-Service Provider Ms. Karen Kugler Superintendent Ms. Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Mahendra Singh Coach N. A. School Counselor Ms. Gabrielle James Parent Ms. Bernadette Wells Parent Coordinator Ms. Tanya Gilliard Field Support Center Staff Member Pierre Galvez Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 600 Total number of ELLs 4 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.67% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N. A. If yes, indicate language(s): N. A. Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools and data sources used to determine the literacy skills of ELLs are ELL Periodic Assessments, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and RNMR Modality data. The information gleaned from the data showed that there has been improvement in the academic performance of ELLs, but, more importantly allows for specific interventions that could be employed for the individual student. Hence, differentiated instruction. Instructional staff also will be able to monitor and adjust instruction more effeciently since the NYSESLAT Modality Report provide information to determine student deficiencies in listening and speaking and reading and writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ELL Program will be evaluated through the NYSESLAT Results, successful credit accumulation as an indication of classes passed and advancement to the next grade level, Regents examinations passed and graduation rate. In addition, Ells are further evaluated based on classwork assignments, tests, student self evaluation assessments and reflections. We evaluate the success of our ELLs by comparing the of data from NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL along with in classroom testing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N. A. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the Spring 2015 NYSESLAT two students are expanding while on eis emerging. Although there has been improvement in the reading, speaking and listening, there are deficiences in the writing. The data revealed that one student improved, one student maintained their level and one student decreased due to absenteeism. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered using a Self-Contained model and homogeneous grouping. We offer a freestanding ENL program where emerging and entering students meet together. b. TBE program. If applicable. N. A. c. DL program. If applicable. N. A. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are programmed based on their level of proficiency performance as indicated on the RLAT Report as measured by the NYSITELL. Students who are at the Beginners level have 3 classes daily every week; Intermediate level have 2 classes daily every week; Advanced level have 1 ESL Class and 1 ELA Class daily every week. 180 minutes a week is required for expanding, 540 minutes for ENL entering and emerging students. Units of study mirror general education with scaffolding. 4  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas deliver instruction following the Standards for ELL, ELA and the Standards for the specific content areas which are aligned to the Common Core Standards. This is accomplished through the use of a differentiated instructional framework that includes explicit instruction, careful modeling, coaching, scaffolding, group discussion, problem solving, cooperative learning groups, flexible grouping, practice opportunities and expectations for independent applications to help students meet and/or exceed New York State and City Standards. Leveled reading materials, manipulatives, graphic organizers, non-verbal and context clues are utilized to provide meaning for instruction and to promote success. Achieve 3000, English Yes textbooks, Read180 and engage NY. Students use translation to assist with content. The programs used have an interdisciplinary approach covering all subject areas. The engage NY curriculum and Achieve 3000 are aligned to CCLS. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students will be given the opportunity to take the Regents examinations in the native language when deemed necessary. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status (a) The instructional plan for SIFE consists of one-to-one tutoring, read aloud activities, phonics, spelling, guided reading and writing, modeled writing, shared writing, audio books - listening, pronumciation and reading, films and use of manipulatives. (b)Develop reading skills. Give language learners many opportunities to read and write in meaningful contexts, in their first and second languages. Draw on effective strategies for increasing literacy skills. Integrate technology to support writing instruction and motivate students to use written language to communicate. Encourage students to develop literacy skills in their native language, then transfer these skills to learning English. Work from strengths. Build on what students already know. Draw on their background experiences and encourage connections between academic concepts and students' own lives. Help students see the value of being able to communicate in multiple languages. Connect with students' families and culture. Incorporate culture and native language, introduce multicultural literature, and draw on the expertise of community members. Give ELL students opportunities to teach others about their first language and home culture. Use engaging instruction. Use effective strategies such as project-based learning, thematic instruction, and cooperative grouping to engage learners. Give students opportunities to talk about shared learning experiences. Hands-on, experiential learning experiences will develop understanding. Help ELL students connect words with meaning by using nonverbal clues and nonlinguistic representation of ideas, including multimedia, manipulatives, simulations, and modeling. Vary assessment strategies. Use wide-ranging assessments, including observations, portfolios, and performance assessments. (c). Students designated as ELLs have additional after-school help, one-to-one tutoring, and lunch time reading with teacher or buddy. They also have the opportunity to participate in Extended Day activities such as PM School and Saturday Extended Day classes and Regents preparation and tutorial sessions to help them to further acquire the skills and subject content needed to master the Regents examinations. Students and parents participate in individual and group counseling to keep both students and parents abreast of their academic progress as well as graduation requirements. Our instructional program will place additional emphasis on the writing, reading and listening component. We will establish a successful writing and reading program by implementing the following practices: ~Conducting explicit instruction of skill. Students will write often and use their peers in the classroom as their audience. Students will work with partners to plan, write edit and to provide each other with feedback. By examining each other’s work, students have the opportunity to learn new words, and understand the mechanics of writing. ~Setting classroom protocols. The focus will be on the protocols of writing. Activities will include the understanding of the writing process, rules and routines of writing and reading comprehension. Students will be taught what to do during the editing stag, conferencing, reading and analyzing. We will emphasize the use of glossaries, dictionaries and highlighters for editing. Students will be asked to keep a notebook with thoughts, Literature Logs, quotes and notes for future writing, reading 5  and interpreting. The teachers will manage time within the diverse writing activities, but also incorporating writing across the curriculum. There will also be a computer workstation with directions for accessing programs, the internet and word processing programs. ~Set high standards for writing. Although we implement all the learning standards in our ESL class, we also need to challenge every child with an enriched curriculum, which includes direct instruction on all the protocols and skills on how to be a successful writer. ~Focusing on vocabulary development. To increase vocabulary, students will be engaged in enriched story-related writing. ~Implementing a differentiated assessment process. Based on the level of Second Language proficiency, each child will have a differentiated growth plan and there will be more teacher and student reflection and debriefing. ~Use rubrics and self-evaluation. The teacher will incorporate a writing rubric to assess level of proficiency in topics taught and they will utilize self-evaluation for self-discovery. (d) To further support the academic advancement of the ELL population, students will enroll in Saturday classes. Students also attend the OELL College Bound Program where students are given targeted assistance in developing reading skills and guided writing, SAT and College. Students and parents will participate in individual and group counseling to ensure their academic success. Students are provided with testing accomodations of extra time for two years and are offered afterschool support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Content areas deliver instruction following the Common Core and content specific standards scaffolded to support students with ELL SWD. This is accomplished through the use of a differentiated instructural framework that includes explicit instruction, careful modeling, coaching, group discussion, problem solving, cooperative learning groups, flexible grouping, practice opportunities and expectations for independent applications to help students meet and/or exceed the Common Core and New York State Standards. Leveled reading materials, manipulatives, graphic organizers, non-verbal and context clues are utilized to provide meaning for instruction and to promote success. Through the after school program. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students who are ELL-SWD are enrolled in CTT classes. The lessons are differentiated to meet the individual needs of students. The instructional strategies include cooperative learning, role playing, the use of modeling, graphic organizers and visuals, concept mapping, vocabulary and language development, guided interactions, scaffolding and the use of computer assisted instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students participate in the After School Tutorials and Extended Day Saturday Regents Review and preparation programs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will continue to improve the delivery of instruction to support the ELLs in the content classes so that they will meet and exceed the benchmarks for the Common Core Standards. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N. A. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 6  ELL students are afforded equal access to all school programs. Students participate in the Homework Helpers Program and Clubs such as the Multicultural Club to help them acclimate as well as to help them develop an appreciation, tolerance and respect for cultural diversity. It also allows them to develop and gain proficiency in learning and speaking English in a social setting. After school support services are offered to all students. Students work with students with the same home language. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Components of The Read 180 Program provides differentiated, adjusted instruction and practice in word study, vocabulary, fluency, spelling and comprehension. Leveled textbooks and other content-based resources such as manipulatives, glossries, dictionaries and libraries are utilized. Ipads are used in the classrooms in small groups. Glossaries for content and dictionaries for translation. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? N. A. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services support, and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. All curricula is grade level and age level appropriate. Teachers use IEPs to modify instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Components of The Read 180 Program provides differentiated, adjusted instruction and practice in word study, vocabulary, fluency, spelling and comprehension. Leveled textbooks and other content-based resources such as manipulatives, glossries, dictionaries and libraries are utilized. Ipads are used in the classrooms in small groups. Glossaries for content and dictionaries for translation. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students participate in the Homework Helpers Program and Clubs such as the Multicultural Club to help them acclimate as well as to help them develop an appreciation, tolerance and respect for cultural diversity. It also allows them to develop and gain proficiency in learning and speaking English in a social setting. The summer bridge program is offered to all incoming freshman. Guidance counselors lead the program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/a 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N. A. 7  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Staff will participate in ongoing, long term targeted professional development with strong emphasis on the Common Core Learning Standards, differentiated and academic language development strategies. The majority of the instructional staff members are senior teachers who have met the requirements (7.5 hours to 10 hours) of professional development in ESL methodology. However, in order to keep abreast of the instructional strategies and teaching methodologies of ELLs, teachers have participated in ELL professional development workshops in QTEL. This include Universal Design for Learning which allows for Multiple means of Representation, Multiple Means of Actions and Expression and Multiple Means of Engagement. The instructional staff also engages in professional development activities throughout the year that enable them to discuss and incoporate ELL-friendly strategies which will support ELLs in the content areas. These strategies increase comprehension, learning and interaction through modeling, acting out, gesturing, showing diagrams and doing hands-on activities and experiments . This ensures that they remain current in the instructional strategies and techniques that will enable our ELLs to succeed. The topics include the following: Academic Vocabulary Text-based Answers Workshop Model Curriculum Mapping Looking at Students' Work Differentiated Instruction Tiered Assessment Using Data to Inform and Support Instruction specifically for ELLs Writing Process Workshop for ELLs Collaborative Planning Use of Native Language Support Resources in the content area classroom (Glossaries, dictionaries, leveled reading materials as available) Testing Accommodations for ELLs (current and former) during standardized and classroom testing. All staff members meet every Monday. Ms. Sartt attends ENL workshops provided by the DOE. Please see response in question 1. Engage NY, Achieve 3000 and Read 180, Theater program for ENL with the Aurthur Miller Foundation. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Any PDs offered by the DOE. All records are maintained in the AP of student services office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to participate in workshops based on their needs and the needs of students. Through individualized counseling and planning sessions, parents are kept abreast of students' progress. Parents learn about graduation requirements, school rules, and other workshops. These targeted workshops include how to access student data using Pupil-8  Path an electronic grading systems and how to intrepret the information. Parents are also given resources on how to improve communication in English. Parents also particpate in school-based activities. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to participate in workshops based on their needs and the needs of students. Through individualized counseling and planning sessions, parents are kept abreast of students' progress. Parents learn about graduation requirements, school rules, and other workshops. These targeted workshops include how to access student data using Pupil-Path an electronic grading systems and how to intrepret the information. Parents are also given resources on how to improve communication in English. Parents also particpate in school-based activities. The parent coordinator has special events and meetings for all parents. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Charles Anderson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Preparatory Academy for Writer School DBN: 29Q283 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Mr. Charles Anderson Principal Mr. Mahendra Singh Assistant Principal Ms. Tanya Gilliard Parent Coordinator Ms. Jacqueline Smartt ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Bernadette Wells Parent Ms. Stephanie Tello/English Teacher/Subject Area Mr. Richard Spanbock/English N. A. N. A. Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ms. Gabrielle James School Counselor Ms. Elaine Lindsey Mr. Pierre Galvez Ms. Karen Kugler Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider Other Other 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q283 School Name: Preparatory Academy for Writers Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Mahendra Singh Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We have gathered the information from ATS reports and student emergency contact cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Creole English Creole 99% 1% English Creole 99% 1% 2  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Lunch Form September Messages/Emails/Updates/Progress Report/Memos September - June How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Additional translated copies requested Skedula/Pupil Path emails will translate automatically to parents according to the students' home language. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September Parent Teacher Conferences November/March PAW Family Night May interpretation service(s)? We plan to provide interpretation services as necessary with an interpreter staff member. We plan to provide interpretation services as necessary with an interpreter staff member. We plan to provide interpretation services as necessary with an interpreter staff member. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 3  Skedula/Pupil Path which is an online system that automatically translates messages sent to parents based on their home languages. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development was provided to teachers on the first day of school regarding the Chancellor's Regulations in a whole group meeting, Additionally resources were provided in hard copy and electronically. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We send all messages via Skedula/Pupil Path which translates email messages based on students' home language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We hold monthly meetings where parental feedback is welcome as well as parental conferences held throughout the year where parents are invited to share their feedback with the school staff. Additionally, ongoing communication between teachers and parents occurs throughout the school year via phones and emails through skedula. 4 
