 30Q286 School Name: YOUNG WOMEN'S LEADERSHIP SCHOOL, ASTORIA Principal: ALLISON PERSAD   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Young Women's Leadership School of Astoria 343000011286 6-12 School Number (DBN): 30Q286 23-15 Newtown Avenue, Astoria, N.Y. 11102 718-267-2839 Phone Number: 718-728-0218 Fax: Dr. Allison Persad apersad@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Dr. AllisonPersad Jackie Shendler Maria Pedemonte Kimberly Castrillon LatesheLee FaoziaKhan Nora Anzer Amanda Rosenblum, YWLN CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 30 Elaine Lindsey Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place, Flushing, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: ELindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-3517 Phone Number: 718-281-7690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   North Queens Lawrence Pendergast FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 Queens Plaza North, 4th floor Long Island City, New York, 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-225-2020 Phone Number: 718-391-8320 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. AllisonPersad Jackie Shendler Maria Pedemonte Mona Youseff LatesheLee FaoziaKhan Nora Anzer N/A James Franco Grace Harrington Kimberly Castrillon *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Assistant Principal   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Michelle Rappa AwatefIbrahim Barbara Jones MalabikaDas JulissaAlvarado Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The Young Women’s Leadership Schools (TYWLS) were established to nurture the intellectual curiosity and creativity of young women by supporting the “whole girl” in order to maximize academic achievement, social emotional well being, and post secondary success to develop the leaders of tomorrow.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. TYWLS is supported by Young Women’s Leadership Network and its College Bound Initiative in order to replicate the best practices of private and independent girls’ schools. TYWLS of Astoria opened in 2006 as the fourth in the network. TYWLS strives to instill in students a sense of self efficacy and community responsibility: characteristics which will support them as they become the leaders of the next generation. The middle-school high school has a population of 614 students from grades 6-12. The school population comprises 40% Hispanic, 32% Asian, 17% White and 8% Black female students. The student body includes 5% English Language Learners and 13% special education students. The school has a 94% attendance rate and and a 100% college acceptance rate into 4 year colleges and universities. In June 2018, 98% of students graduated and 100% of student graduates plan to enroll in college. The Young Women’s Leadership School of Astoria is a college-bound, all-girls public school from grades 6-12. Our school strives to customize individual learning paths for each of our students. We achieve this across all grades and subjects through a variety of methods and grounding philosophies, including the infusion of 21st century skills into our grading system. TYWLS of Astoria utilizes a mastery based grading system referred to as Outcomes Based Grading. Students are assessed on skills across assignments, providing them multiple opportunities to work on the same skill in a variety of ways. Our entire school uses shared outcomes that are aligned with 21st century competencies and the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 Partnerships and Initiatives Student Leadership Network The Young Women's Leadership Girls Education Team (our founding organization) supports two life-changing programs that empower students to break the cycle of poverty through education. They created The Young Women’s Leadership Schools which are a high-performing network of all-girls public secondary schools and the College Bound Initiative. College Bound Initiative (All Grades) Created by the Student Leadership Network, CBI is a comprehensive college guidance program that empowers students to realize their higher education and life potential by placing full-time college guidance experts in high-need public schools. CBI counselors maximize students’ college awareness, access, and financial aid awards. Our school has a full time Director of College Counseling who assists with all college applications, financial aid support and scholarship opportunities. Verizon Innovation Design Learning 0  Verizon Innovative Learning brings technology and hands-on learning opportunities to kids in underserved schools and communities. We inspire tomorrow’s creators to use technology to build brighter futures for themselves, their families and the world. CHAMPS (Middle School) The CHAMPS Middle School Sports and Fitness League is an initiative of the NYCDOE that promotes student physical activity. The name CHAMPS derives from the initials of the five characteristics that describe our participants: Cooperative, Healthy, Active, Motivated and Positive Students. CHAMPS sports offered include Volleyball, Soccer and Basketball. College Now with LaGuardia Community College: Students take courses on site in order to gain college credit. Femcho* (6 th Grade) Femcho is a program developed to promote confidence, leadership, health, and fitness among girls in a fun, hip way. The Femcho* formula consists of 30 minutes of dance/fitness, 30 minutes of girl talk, and a confidence-building compliment. Girls Inc. is a free afterschool program offered to grades 6 through 8. Girls Inc. inspires all girls to be strong, smart and bold through after school activities, tutoring, and trips in order improve social emotional and academic growth. The Girls Inc. after school program works with the TYWLS Administration and staff in order to align to our own goals of college readiness, health and wellness and STEM. Girls Who Code (High School) This national nonprofit is working to close the gender gap in the technology and engineering sectors. With support from public and private partners, Girls Who Code works to educate, inspire, and equip high school girls with the skills and resources to pursue opportunities in computing fields. Cornell Tech Robotics High School students build, program, and code robots at Roosevelt Island with the assistance of Cornell Tech. In February, students compete in the national FIRST Robotics Competition. Lego Robotics (High School) Teams of up to 10 students design, build, and program their robots to compete in a game of skill and strategy against other teams. The FTC robot kit is reusable from year-to-year and uses a variety of programming languages. 1  Teams including coaches, mentors and volunteers develop strategy and build robots based on sound engineering principles – and then put the robots to the test in annual competitions. PowerPlay NYC (Middle School) This program is designed to develop girls as leaders, advance their health and create safe spaces, where girls play hard, have fun and gain the confidence to try new things. Public School Athletic League (PSAL) Sports PSAL Soccer PSAL Bowling PSAL Volleyball PSAL Basketball PSAL Outdoor Track and Field: PSAL Softball PSAL Table Tennis Step Up Women’s Network (10 th & 11 th Grade) This nonprofit ignites girls to fulfill their potential. They empower teen girls from under-resourced communities to be confident, college-bound, and career-ready through connections, collaborations, and continuous development. Software Engineering Program (SEP): The Software Engineering Program (SEP) is a comprehensive, standards-aligned computer science and software engineering education program for grades 6 to 12. The goals of the program are: (1) to increase the number of high school graduates, particularly from traditionally under-represented groups, who are ready to enter new and emerging high-tech fields, and (2) to develop students’ computational thinking and problem solving skills in real-world contexts. The program currently offers core curriculum in the following areas: computer programming, robotics, web design and development, physical computing, and mobile computing. As it scales, the program provides schools with structured full-year course pathways including core computer science curriculum and elective topics designed to develop students’ technical and creative skill. SEP students will participate in work-based experiences with major industry leaders and partners. Urban Advantage (Middle School) 2  UA is a standards-based partnership program designed to improve students’ understanding of scientific inquiry through collaborations between urban public school systems and science cultural institutions such as zoos, botanical gardens, museums, and science centers. We believe that their extraordinary scientific and cultural resources convey a true “urban advantage.” Verizon Innovation Design Learning School Apple Distinguished School 2017-2019 (one of two schools in New York State!) 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have 13% Student with Disabilities and 5% English Language Learners, we provide Integrated Co Teaching classes and work with students to meet their special learning needs including reading levels, social emotional challenges and language barriers. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on the NYC Department of Education School Survey Report 2018-19, 97% of respondents had a positive response in the rigorous instruction category, relevant to common core shifts in literacy compared to city wide average of 81%. Based on the 2017-18 Quality Review Report for the school, improvements in the following areas have been identified: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms (Curriculum 1.1- Proficient) (Pedagogy 1.2- Developing) and (Assessment 2.2- Proficient), the school intends to connect these areas to "Rigorous Instruction" from the Framework for Great Schools. The school's lesson planning, unit planning, professional development work will be focused on Common Core alignment, high standards across grade levels and critical thinking skills for all to be college and career ready. Collaboratively, teacher teams revised the 2018-19 instructional foci for our school to deepen rigorous instruction:  Consistent purposeful writing embedded in student work in all content areas.  Student-centered rigorous project-based learning with multiple entry points that engages students in learning knowledge and skills aligned to CC Standards structured around complex, authentic questions and carefully designed products and tasks.  Consistent formative assessments including student self-reflection to individualize and monitor student progress while maintaining congruence of instructional outcomes. 3  In an effort to strengthen family and community ties from the Framework for Great schools, the principal and Parent Association and staff will work to create varied opportunities for parents to have a voice (Ex: Breakfast with Principal Persad). We are continuously working on increasing parent teacher communication through digital and written communication. Finally, creating a supportive environment from the Framework for Great schools will be addressed through a culture and climate committee, a student leadership committee and a steering committee with all stake holders. Through this work, we foster a supportive, encouraging and caring school environment that provides students with the skills and knowledge they need to be great leaders who will transform themselves, make a positive impact on their communities, and change the world. At TYWLS of Astoria, teachers act as instructional and social emotional coaches, empowering students to consistently engage in meta cognition, innovation and exploration. 4  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q286 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 565 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 5 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 15 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 79.5% % Reduced Lunch 4.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 39.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 17.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.12 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 75.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 97% 92% 95.1% 28.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 39 43 8 8 94.8% 5.1% 12.2% 7.3% 34.7% 0.9% 2 33% 3 50.0% 78% 95% 95% 97.3% 53% N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A NO N/A N/A NO N/A YES N/A N/A YES 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment Data Source: RESI, ATS, Graduation Tracker by Cohort, NYSED Report Card, Testing Data, School Quality Guide, School Snapshot, and 2017-18 Quality Review. Strengths: The school has a 98% graduation rate, well above the city-wide average. Students surpass the city-wide average of credit accumulation in all grades. Attendance in the school is 95% and enrollment in college within six months of graduating is 90%. However, a careful review of the data sources listed above indicates several achievement gaps including meeting the needs of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Needs: 2017-18 Quality Review indicated pedagogy (1.2) and curricula (1.1) alignment to Common Core Standards as a developing area of focus for the school. STARS data indicates there is a need for improving the College and Career Readiness benchmarks in Mathematics achievement. Weighted Regents Pass rates indicate there is a need in for improvement in Algebra 2 and Global History compared to borough wide averages. Mathematics- ATS Testing Data reveals mathematics achievement data is an area of improvement. ELA-State exam data indicate there is a need for improvement in middle school literacy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 6  By June 2019, teachers will implement our instructional foci by increasing the quality and quantity of writing across all content areas which will result in a 3% increase in the percentage of student College and Career Readiness standards including ELLs and SWDs as measured by weighted regents pass rates in all core academic subject areas. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Daily and weekly, structured content team meetings with a focus on professional development, offering teacher choice, Content leaders will focus on writing across disciplines, curriculum mapping and pacing Teachers will work to align mastery outcomes and learning targets to expectations on state assessments. All teachers September-June 2019 Common Planning will be allocated for ICT and Special Education teachers to work with general education teachers on targeting Individualized Education Plans collaborate on lesson and unit planning to support the needs of ELLs and SWDs embedding specialized technology resources. General Education and ICT teachers September-June 2019 Lead Content Specialists, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Peer Collaborative Advanced Placement Teacher, Assistant Principal and Principal. Special Education Inclusion Coordinator, Special Education team, General Education teachers, Assistant Principal, Principal. All parents September-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Principals. All teachers, all students September-June 2019 Grade Level Teacher Leaders, Professional Development Committee, and APs and Principal. Monthly, “Parents as Partners at TYLWS-Astoria” sessions to inform and involve parents in the decision making of instructional objectives and initiatives, in order to support their daughter’s academic and college and career readiness achievement. Student led conferences in November, access to online Jumprope grading system, weekly parent engagement accessibility for all teachers will allow parents to be informed. In school instructional focus for teacher planning and after school tutoring support in core academic areas.  School wide instructional foci created by all stakeholders to be embedded in professional development cycles, curriculum, pedagogy and assessments.  Conduct research based observations using the Danielson Framework for Teaching with specific and targeted feedback.  After school tutoring in all core academic subject areas. 8 Student portfolios will house student strengths and growth areas of mastery outcomes. All students will collect samples of work in each content area to review at Student Led Conferences. MS students will create a student portfolio files, HS students will create digital portfolios. All teachers and students November 2017 and March 2019 Peer Collaborative Teacher and Content Leaders, AP and Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will provide monthly parent sessions with the principal to share instructional initiatives, do walk through visits and work collaboratively with the parent association in order to share instructional goals at monthly meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher/supervisor per session, per diem, instructional materials, professional development coaches, professional development training vendors; partnership grants. Math and special education teachers, along with the Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, will implement the above strategies. Administration will meet with teachers during after-school department meetings to include teachers in the decision making process regarding the use and effectiveness of the above strategies. As a Title I School-wide Program, Conceptual Consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds to implement this action plan from September 2018-June 2019 as indicated below: 2. Per Session/ Coverages-For Regents Tutoring leading up to January and June Regents Exams- from September to June. 3. Textbooks and informational resources- digital and hard copy to support Regents bound courses. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Benchmark  By January 2019 , professional development content leaders supporting all academic teachers will collect and review units of study with focus on writing integration in each content area according to state standards, Common Core alignment, mastery based outcomes and college readiness anchors. There will be a 5% increase on scores on written responses on Part II of all Regents exams correlated to our purposeful writing instructional foci. Data from the exams will be used to inform instruction, after school tutoring and resources for student achievement. 9  Reflective inquiry of Professional Development cycles. Examine Regents results, cohort data to inform programming and impact end of year graduation statistics for 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Mock Regents Data Tools, Jumprope Mastery Reports, Formative Assessment Data from AP for All, Regents Item Analysis reports, School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Needs Assessment Data Source: RESI, ATS, Graduation Tracker by Cohort, NYSED Report Card, Testing Data, School Quality Guide, School Snapshot, and 2016-17 Quality Review. Strengths - Attendance in the school is 95% and enrollment in college within six months of graduating is 90%. The school uses the restorative justice model and has lost at school mentors to support the social emotional needs of all girls. The school has an on site College Bound counselor through the College Bound Initiative supporting students and families through the college process. The Advisory program model has a lead advisor for each grade and each teacher and administrator has a small group advisory supporting the needs of the whole girl. Needs: According to the NYC School Survey report, 74% of students responded that in most of all of their classes at their school, most students feel it is important to come to school every day. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 100% of teachers and assistant principals will support a small group advisory in order to improve the social-emotional well being and growth of all students which will result in a 3% increase in the percentage of students who agree strongly that there is at least one adult in the school they can confide in on the NYC survey result measure of student-teacher trust. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students will have the opportunity to participate in small group advisory sessions at least 90 minutes per week to strengthen self confidence, cooperative behavior, to build meaningful peer and self relationships. All Students Sept 2018 -June 2019 Structured PD time with social emotional supports and training facilitated by Lead Advisors and Guidance Counselors. Teachers will work to set goals for year one implementation including raising awareness, improving school wide communication and celebrating successes. All advisors will engage in weekly advisory team meetings as integrated with weekly professional development cycles to address student academic needs, attendance, Kid Talk, discipline issues, lateness, and overall commitment to school values. Parent Informational Sessions hosted to share social emotional strategies and values. Monthly parent workshops and meetings with the Principal - Breakfast with Principal Persad to share ideas and inform instructional goals. Also, sessions for parents hosted by the parent coordinator. All Teachers (Advisors) Sept 2018 -June 2019 All Teachers (Advisors) Sept 2018 -June 2019 All Parents Sept 2018 -June 2019 All teachers, APs, Guidance Counselors, Lead Advisor All teachers, APs, Guidance Counselors, Lead Advisor All teachers, APs, Guidance Counselors, Lead Advisor All teachers, APs, Guidance Counselors, Lead Advisor, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will provide monthly parent sessions with the principal, teacher/guidance led professional workshops with a focus on social emotional strategies to support their daughters at home. Through our partnership with Thrive, our school will provide on site professional trainings with mental health consultants to support the whole girl with family partnerships. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Instructional materials, professional development coaches, professional development training); partnership grants. Initiating programs to support whole child learning; conferences to engage in social emotional learning. 2. Advisors Lead Advisor and Guidance Counselors, will implement the above strategies. Administration will meet with social emotional team during school meetings to include teachers in the decision making process regarding the use and effectiveness of the above strategies. As a Title I School-wide Program, Conceptual Consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds to implement this initiative. 3. Action plan from September 2018-June 2019 as indicated below: Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Benchmark: By January 2019, 100% of students will be administered and complete a student satisfaction and support survey administered by the Lead Advisor and Guidance counselors in an effort to understand areas of strength, need, focus, resources and materials needed for successful implementation of a new advisory program. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Survey results, NYC Survey results, Student Attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment Data Source: RESI, ATS, Graduation Tracker by Cohort, NYSED Report Card, Testing Data, School Quality Guide, School Snapshot, and 2016-17 Quality Review. In consultation with the School Leadership Team, Peer Collaborative teacher, content leaders, Data from the School Quality Guide, School Snapshot, Quality Review, and Learning Environment Survey were analyzed and linked to different Framework Elements. We reached consensus in identifying Collaborative Teaching as a primary element to target for the CEP. As a PROSE school, new initiatives are driven by our teachers and leaders working in a fully collaborative community focused on excellence for students. Teacher collaboration continues to be a priority, incorporating peer-observations as well as regular grade and content team meetings to strengthen collaboration and sharing of best practices. Quantitative data from departments indicate that students struggle with mastering particular skills within subject specific disciplines. For example, in Algebra I, creating equations, interpreting functions, and constructing and comparing different function models. In Chemistry, areas of focus include atomic concepts, Moles/Stoichiometry, and oxidation and reduction. 4  Our priority needs will be to provide professional development experiences that are sustained and coherent and that to provide professional development experiences that include enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. Strengths: According the NYC School Quality Guide 2017-18, with regard to cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction, 96% of teachers say that they develop appropriate Individualized Education Programs for their students with disabilities, 6% greater than both the city and district. Needs: According the NYC School Quality Guide 2017-18, with regard to the quality of professional development, 64% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas, 18% less than the district, and 13% less than the city overall. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase in sustained professional development experiences as measured by a 5% increase in teachers who say that their professional development experiences include enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas according to the NYC School Quality survey measure. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly, monthly, and quarterly structured teacher-led professional development. Inquiry-based CCLS aligned professional development will be offered to teachers meeting in grade level teams, content teams and leadership teams. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Engage in structured weekly and monthly meetings to work on curriculum, Kid Talk, instructional rounds, inter-visitation, advisory model, and teacher rounds. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Teachers and parents have regular discussions about how each school program or activity links to student learning through academic standards during parent engagement sessions, student led conferences and active engagement. All Parents September 2018-June 2019 School leaders will ensure that sufficient planning time is provided to implement the necessary modifications to the curriculum, and coaches will participate in the planning sessions to ensure alignment. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Peer Collaborative Teacher, Content Leaders, Assistant Principal, Principal Special Education Coordinator, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Content Leaders, Assistant Principal, Principal Peer Collaborative Teacher, Content Leaders, Grade Team Leaders, AP and Principal Peer Collaborative Teacher, Content Leaders, Grade Team Leaders, AP and Principal Parent Association Presidents are included on School Steering Committee to discuss how to raise expectations and achievement for every student and to draft a five year plan for the school. Parent Association October 2018-June 2019 PA President, Principal, Steering Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will provide monthly parent sessions with the principal to share instructional initiatives, do walk-through visits and work collaboratively with the parent association in order to share instructional goals at monthly meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Content Leaders, Teachers, Administration, and Instructional Coaches, Peer Collaborative Teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher Surveys, teacher attendance, teacher retention rates, NYC School Survey, MOSL data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Midyear, teachers will engage in a survey to share outcomes of teacher teams, effectiveness, and connections to academic goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment Data Source: RESI, ATS, Graduation Tracker by Cohort, NYSED Report Card, Testing Data, School Quality Guide, School Snapshot, and 2016-17 Quality Review. Based on the PPR 2017-18 feedback, and PPO feedback Indicator 1.2 was an area for improvement. The school must further embed opportunities for consistent highly effective instruction. Strengths: According to our 2016 Quality Review, our Instructional Core for 1.1(curriculum) and 2.2(Assessment) were rated as well developed. Needs: According to our 2016 Quality Review, our Instructional Core for 1.2, consistent pedagogical practices are areas of growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will facilitate measures of teacher practice through coaching, observations, learning walks, teacher rounds while identifying and co-creating clear next steps for 100% of teachers in regular and ongoing cycles of classroom observations. 8  9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Engage in teacher led professional development and intervisitation cycles with a focus on deepening rich project based units of instruction aligned to mastery and state standards All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Engage in learning walks and coaching conversations as well as cycles of observations and feedback weekly. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Engage in Teacher Rounds by NYC Department of Education, Office of Post Secondary Readiness to observe, visit, video and give feedback to peers Department Teachers Parents, teachers and school leaders have the opportunity to engage in ongoing conversations about instructional practices during scheduled parent engagement events and monthly meetings All Parents Student voice is encouraged on instructional intiatives and programs at student government and grade level town halls. All students September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Peer Collaborative Teacher, Content Leaders, UFT Chapter Leader, Assistant Principal, Principal Assistant Principal, Principal Peer Collaborative Teacher, Content Leaders, and content teachers Assistant Principal, Principal, Parent Association, School Leadership Team Principal, Student Government, Lead Advisor, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will provide monthly parent sessions with the principal to share instructional initiatives, do walk through visits and work collaboratively with the parent association in order to share instructional goals at monthly meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0  Per session for teacher leaders, content teams, software and hardware resources, conference and professional development opportunities by borough field support centers and outside vendors. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, school leaders will conduct mid point evaluations and complete post conferences by providing timely and constructive feedback while setting goals and action plans aligned to student outcomes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher surveys, MOTP Advance data tools, coaching logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths - The Quality Review 2016-17 indicates a rating of well developed.. The findings of the QR reported that the school consistently conveys high expectations that promote parental involvement. TYWLS partners with families to support students to own their educational experiences so they are prepared for their next levels. Some of the activities that help develop the partnership between the school and parents are "Morning Coffee Chats with the Principal," Parent Grade Meetings, Parent Association meetings, and individual meetings with students and parents. According to the 2016-17 School Survey, 92% of parents surveyed responded that they are somewhat or very likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent teacher conference with their child's teacher. Parents, teachers, and students report high levels of respect throughout the school community. Needs: 2016-17Learning Environment Survey and Tripod survey results indicate there is a need to improve volunteerism among parents. 61% of parents indicate they have never volunteered to support the school (ie:support with school wide events) . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, there will be 5% parent involvement increase and articulation between home and school communications in order to provide families with opportunities to be a part of school level decision making, instructional initiatives and the overall culture of the school as measured by targeted indicators in the NYCDOE Learning Environment survey results and school focus group data. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Identify parent liaison within grade team structure Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increase positive parent contact through postcards, phone calls, conferences, and the use of the K-12 Automated Calling system and the Remind App for phones. All parents and families September 2018-June 2019 Monthly check ins on parent attendance at PA meetings All parents and families September 2018-June 2019 All parents and teachers September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Supporting Personnel, Grade team leaders, Administration Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Supporting Personnel, Grade team leaders, Administration PA Executive Board, parent coordinator, supporting personnel, administration Principal will hold Monthly Parents as Partners Sessions to engage families in decision making process All parents and families Data collection of email addresses and parent contact information to begin to identify parents by grade level to serve as parent grade leaders. All parents and families September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, AP, supporting personnel Principal, School secretary, Data Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our school will provide monthly parent sessions with the principal to share instructional initiatives, do walk through visits and work collaboratively with the parent association in order to share instructional goals at monthly meetings. Additionally, the Parent Coordinator will work with outside organizations to bring workshops to the parent/family community (Lands End Uniform workshop, Cornell's Cooperative Extension: Nutrition and Health, Department of Health: Mental Health First Aid, Sharing and Caring: Breast and Other Cancers Awareness) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 3  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Parent workshops, training, parent classes, materials and refreshments , professional development trainers/presenters. 2. Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal(s), Guidance Counselors, will implement the above strategies. Administration will meet with teachers during school department meetings to include teachers in the decision making process regarding the use and effectiveness of the above strategies. As a Title I School-wide Program, Conceptual Consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds to implement this action plan from September 2018-June 2019 as indicated below: Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be a 5% increase in parent attendance at all parent engagement events to be measured through parent sign in sheets and logs. In addition, there will be an increase use of the parent contact tracker by grade level with parent outreach goals examined and measured. Mid -year analysis of all parent engagement initiatives. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYCDOE Learning Environment survey results and school focus group data will be reviewed and targeted supports will be put into place, parent attendance at monthly workshops, parent surveys from Parent Association. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day and after school Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) HS Students who struggled to pass 9 th grade or 10 th grade ELA and students who have not yet passed the ELA Regents. For MS, Students who scored less than a 2.4 on the previous yearsELA test. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Independent Daily Reading ● Leveled Libraries with High Interest Books ● Learning Stations ● Portfolio’s of work showing progress over time Small group instruction via one HS and one MS course as well as peer tutoring and after school tutoring by teachers. Double period Humanities courses in Middle school. Double period US History/Humanities in 8th grade. ● Self-assessment ● Goal Setting ● Differentiated Instruction ● Cooperative Learning (small groups/pairs) ● Tutoring ● Accurate and timely feedback ● Project Based Learning ● Graphic Organizers 5 During school day and after school. Saturday's from 8am - 12pm. Small group instruction via one HS and one MS course as well as peer tutoring and after school tutoring by teachers. Saturday Targeted Tutoring (Regents Reboot) run by teachers and Science/Math Assistant Principal. Mathematics HS Students who struggled to pass Algebra I and Algebra 2. For MS, Students who scored less than a 2.4 on the previous years Math test. ● Word Walls ● Modeling ● Student Choice ● Visual and Auditory Instructions - Literature Circles Course ● Flipped Courses ● Hands-on Activities with Manipulatives ● Portfolio’s of work showing progress over time ● Self-assessment ● Goal Setting ● Differentiated Instruction ● Cooperative Learning (small groups/pairs) ● Tutoring - Targeted ● Accurate and timely feedback ● Project Based Learning ● Consistent and Familiar Routines ● Graphic Organizers ● Word Walls ● Modeling ● Student Choice 6 Field Trips Gardening During school day and after school. Teacher Web Sites Saturday's from 8am - 12pm. Saturday Targeted Tutoring (Regents Reboot) run by teachers and Science/Math Assistant Principal. AfterschoolTutoring, Lunchtime Targeted Tutoring by Teachers During school day and after school. Science Students who failed the Living Environment test or struggled to pass grade 7 science Social Studies Students who failed the Global Studies course/exam . ● Visual and Auditory Instructions Regents Test Preparation - Analysis of questions, rubrics Project based learning, hands on experiments, videos, caring for live animals, real word experiments, hands-on activities with scientific equipment. Regents Test Preparation - Analysis of questions, rubrics ● Project Based Learning and A-synchronous learning, Wilson Instruction ● Independent Daily Reading ● Leveled Libraries with High Interest Books ● Learning Stations ● Portfolio’s of work showing progress over time ● Self-assessment ● Goal Setting ● Differentiated Instruction 7 ● Cooperative Learning (small groups/pairs) ● Tutoring ● Accurate and timely feedback ● Project Based Learning ● Consistent and Familiar Routines ● Graphic Organizers ● Word Walls ● Modeling ● Student Choice ● Visual and Auditory Instructions Lost at School Counseling and Peer Tutoring support Students with low credit accumulation and poor attendance. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) During school day and after school Peer Tutoring, counseling by Guidance Counselor, meetings with Faculty mentor and Advisor, student-led conferences with faculty if parents don’t attend 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Five 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Meal vouchers, uniforms, clothing, school supplies, connection to adviser, guidance counselor and weekly check ins Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Some of the strategies that are employed to attract highly qualified teachers are the provision of alternative routes of certification, high quality research based professional development, the active recruitment of certified teachers at job fairs and student teachers and partnerships with university schools of education such as New York University, Columbia University Teachers College, Bank Street College of Education, and Hunter College of the City University. We coordinate and integrate our funding streams to ensure the quality of our program. Under the Title II program, teacher and principal quality is ensured through recruitment and retention of teachers and principals with the Transition to Teaching Program will be used to recruit and retain mid-career professionals and recent graduates. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High-quality and ongoing professional development for teachers, principals, and paraprofessionals that enable all children in the Schoolwide Program to meet the Common Core State Standards: To ensure that all staff is trained in data analysis and interpretation to improve attendance and instruction, we provide professional development in these areas with the support and assistance of Bridges for Learning Network, The Young Women’s Leadership Network, ATS coordinators, attendance supervisors and district assessment liaisons. For new and inexperienced principals and assistant principals, Bridges for Learning support includes extensive research based professional development, on-site technical assistance, buddying in quads with experienced principals and mentoring. For new and inexperienced teachers, the school provides buddy teachers, new teacher training, and mentoring through our Coaching template. Bridges for Learning Network, The Young Women’s Leadership Foundation as well as the District. Our professional development is outcomes-based and directly linked to student needs identified through data analysis as detailed on the school’s CEP. We conduct professional development through a variety of research-based strategies drawn from the New York City Professional Development Standards and the National Council of Staff Development. These strategies include: job-embedded support such as in-class demonstration lessons and modeling 1  of research-based strategies. In addition, we have teachers who meet to discuss and/or research specific issues or questions that assist in developing best practices. Another research-based strategy is intra-visitations; that is, teachers are encouraged to visit and observe other teachers’ classrooms so as to learn and benefit from others’ expertise and experiences. Coaches have been hired to help teachers generate meaningful data and develop strategies on how to use this data to drive instruction and improve student performance. Teachers are encouraged to attend conferences and workshops outside of school. We further ensure high quality professional development through our own professional development plans based on annual needs assessments and through an incorporation of professional development provided by the District, Bridges for Learning and The Young Women’s Leadership School of Astoria. The focus of professional development is on strengthening the skills, content, context, and process knowledge of new teachers in all subject areas to ensure that all teachers are providing instruction aligned with the standards and assessments. In addition, general education teachers will continue to receive training/support that focuses on strategies for teaching diverse learners, embedding Common Core and what Teacher Effectiveness looks like and sounds like. The focus for special educators will be on strengthening their content area knowledge as well as increasing their repertoire of instructional strategies. The model for professional development will be expanded to include a wide variety of delivery systems to meet the diverse needs of all school based staff. Every classroom has a networked computer for teacher use to connect to the intranet school website which features teacher resources and toolkits linked to the library website and the DOE website which takes the teacher to a number of links on the Common Core standards, curriculum, assessments, and other resources Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 2  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In September, a MOSL committee meeting was held in which teachers made a recommendation to the principal regarding the MOSL option to be used this school year. There is ongoing professional development focused on using state assessment results to make informed decisions on classroom practice and student outcomes. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 289,964 0 0 0 3,243,330 X na na na X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A na na na 5A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 3  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Young Women's Leadership School of Astoria, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Young Women's Leadership School of Astoria will support parents and families of Title I students by: ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 6  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Young Women's Leadership School of Astoria, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 7  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 8  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 9  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 0  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name The Young Women's Leadership School Borough Queens School Number 286 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Allison Persad Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lindsey Corcoran Teacher/Subject Area Jackie Shendler/ Humanities Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Kimberly Castrillon Coach N/A School Counselor Gayathri Iyer & Meryem Ibrahim Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 2  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 554 Total number of ELLs 24 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.33% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The ENL team analyzed the NYSESLAT scores of ELLs, along with the State test scores, and classroom formative assessments. The data helped identify that many ELLs were grade levels behind in writing and behind in Regents courses. This year the ENL teacher is focusing her program around Regents courses and ELA or Humanities in the middle school. Additionally the ENL teacher has 5 common planning periods to work in collaboration with the content teachers to plan instructional scaffolds for students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? - Common Planning with Co-Teachers - ENL flexible scheduling 3  - ENL professional development - Co-Teacher professional development 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program for ELLs is evaluated in various ways. Classroom assessments, both formative and summative, help determine the success of our ELL program. Additionally, observations of the teacher using the Danielson Framework help ensure our ELL program is rigorous and successful. The ENL teacher and Content teachers also look through summative assessments together to determine areas of need for students. Communication with parents also helps us gauge the success of our program through Parent Teacher Conferences, Annual ELL meetings with parents and informal conversations with parents as well. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? - Inquiry Teams - Co-Planning Periods - Professional Development - JumpRope shared online grading system 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We have a range of proficiency levels across the grades. However 19 out of our 20 ELLs tested at expanding or transitioning last year. Therefore most of our ELLs require only integrated ENL services, which demonstrates their growing proficiency levels. We also have a trend of lower writing scores. Reading and Speaking are our students strengths. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? - ENL teacher and Administration use this data for program to ensure all students get mandated time. - ENL teacher uses shared Google docs to update staff on ELL students levels and areas of need. - JumpRope, shared online grading system is used to review students areas of need to make sure our ENL program is best supporting students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. TYWLS of Astoria has a freestanding ENL program that services 24 ELLs and 7 Former ELLs from 6 th-12th grade. Based on our students' scores on the NYSESLAT, most of our students receive integrated ENL support in their content classes. Therefore students are grouped by grade level and in general education classes. They are homogeneously grouped, because our ELLs are mostly at the same proficiency level. Additionally this ensures that they receive their mandated time from the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher then collaborates with the ELA teachers to develop plans to address students language needs in the classroom. 4  b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Administration and ENL teacher review ELL students' schedules to ensure that all students are receiving services according to their English proficiency levels as designated by the NYSELAT. ELL students schedules are arranged to ensure they have the correct mandate of integrated or standalone ENL minutes. Flexible minutes are scheduled to best support students. Currently, all expanding, and transitioning students from grades 6-11 receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL a week in Humanities or ELA. Our commanding students all receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL support. We have two Emerging students who get 3 standalone periods of ENL services and some struggling Transitioning students also come to standalone period. Many of these students meet with the ENL teacher after school and during lunch where they receive additional support as well. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our freestanding ENL program and all content area classes at TYWLS of Astoria are conducted in English. The ENL teacher collaborates with content area teachers to ensure that all instruction is differentiated and helps to adapt lessons and reading materials when needed in order to make content more comprehensible for ELLs. The ENL teacher provides teachers with materials such as glossaries, book lists and instructional websites to support teaching and learning. In all classes, students are expected to read, write, and speak on a daily basis. The identification and study of key terms promotes language development and is an integral part of the ELA curriculum. Additionally our school is focused on having daily purposeful writing throughout all content areas. This gives our ELLs regular opportunities to develop their communication skills and receive feedback from their teachers. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are able to take standardized tests in their home languages, while also being provided with the English-language version of the test. They can also use home language glossaries on content area assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. We currently have 3 SIFE students who have been in our school for 5 years. They have all reached the expanding level and receive support mostly in their Regents content courses. b. We have 2 newcomers to our school this year. They are both at the emerging level. They receive stand alone services to help them with basic English literacy. c. We have 15 developing ELLs in our school. They receive support in their content classes to ensure they are gaining academic content vocabulary. They are all being encouraged to participate in our after school ENL program and many students seek out additional help during lunch as well. d. Our 4 long term ELLs receive one additional period of ELA as well. These students are nearly fluent in English and require instruction which develops vocabulary and stronger writing skills. The inclusion of multiple opportunities for reading, writing and speaking in English into each content area help to address long term ELLs’ evolving needs. 5  e. We currently have 7 former ELLs at TYWLS. These students have tested proficient on the NYSESLAT within the past 2 years, and they are afforded time and a half on all assessments, both state and local measures. Additionally, they are encouraged to use bilingual glossaries and dictionaries in all classes. These students also receive the mandated 90 minutes of ENL services a week. However, many receive 180 minutes as the ENL teacher is in their class everyday to support current ELLs as well. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our 5 ELL-SWD students are in an integrated co-teaching classroom. This ensures that they are being given the same grade-level materials as their peers. The ENL teacher pushes in to provide scaffolds to help her access the grade-level content by using instructional strategies such as: read aloud of difficult texts, key vocabulary words, sentence starters, breaking down of skills into steps, graphic organizers, and so on. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have 5 ELL-SWDs. The ENL teacher and the Special Education teacher push-in to her class together. They have common planning periods to collaborate on how to best support their students and create materials to help with IEP goals and increase English proficiency in the integrated co-teaching classroom. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ENL teacher supports students ELA and humanities. Previously she has done integrated ENL in Earth Science, Global History, US History, Algebra, and ELA. The ENL teacher also does Regents tutoring with ELLs. Across the grades we use interventions such as: differentiated instruction, small group work, discovery process, rubrics, portfolios, student choice, professional development for teachers. Each of these interventions is offered in English in all content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are working to encourage tenacity and grit in our ELL students. To help them develop ways to search for their own answers. Many of our ELL students see the ENL teacher only 1 period throughout the day. This year the ENL teacher and the Earth Science co-teacher conducted an inquiry together around building up ELL students tenacity in the classroom. We want to look for more ways to encourage ELLs to be independent learners. We will continue an inquiry cycle next year centered on ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Any student can participate in after-school programming. Often if an ELL student is applying for a selective after-school program, the ENL teacher will speak to the teachers in charge of the program to answer any questions the after-school teachers may have. ELLs are encouraged to participate in the school community. We offer Drama Club, Girls Inc, Regents prep, sports clubs and others after-school that are open to our ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology courses are offered as elective courses, and students are encouraged to do online research for school related projects and assignments. Computer-based research is integrated throughout the whole school curriculum. Throughout the school, every student has their own laptop that they can take home. They are responsible for the computer throughout the year and can use it in their classes. Students use programs such as a picture dictionary, GoogleEarth, Weebly, NYC Public 6  Library eBooks and more. The computers support language development while at the same time provide appropriate scaffolds to content area learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Students’ home languages are supported by the use of bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. We also provide our students with textbooks and materials in their home languages when appropriate and available. Students can also use their laptop to translate when needed. Students are encouraged to communicate and write in the home language when they feel they are better able to express themselves in that language. Also many students integrate their home language into writing projects for class. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs’ ages and grade levels are taken into consideration in terms of resources and materials. We try to ensure that the materials used by ELL students are age appropriate and theme based. We look for high interest, low readability texts, such as graphic novels, in the ELA and Humanities classrooms so that ELLs can access material at their level without sacrificing interest or suitability. Additionally the ELLs read the same grade level texts as their peers and the ENL teacher provides scaffolds like an audio copy or a video of her reading the book aloud. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students who are new to TYWLS receive additional support through our advisory program. In the fall, advisory teachers review with students TYWLS specific procedures - how to use jumprope to monitor their grades and progress, how we handle conflict (Lost at School model), the intensives program, etc. Advisory is a smaller class setting that also allows students to ask questions and build community with their teachers and peers. All of the teachers on staff have an advisory of 15 students. Additionally our ENL teacher hosts a welcome party for new ELLs in the fall. This way the new ELL students can meet other current ELLs in the school. Throughout the school year, when a new ELL enters the school, they are paired with another ELL for the first week to help orientate them to TYWLS. Additionally the ENL teacher checks in frequently to monitor their adjustment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish to 8 th , 9 th , 10 th , 11 th and 12 th graders. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not Applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 7  The professional development activities planned for all content teachers, the parent coordinator and the ENL teacher, include meeting the needs of ELL students across the content areas. All staff members are involved in the planning and implementation of these sessions. Using data from the NYSESLAT, ELA state test and classroom assessments we analyze how to improve writing across the content areas. We also take advantage of the many PD opportunities provided by The Young Women's Leadership Network and the Department of Education. The Young Women's Leadership School of Astoria is a designated PROSE school within the NYC Department of Education. This gives the school flexibility in scheduling. We have a day of professional development built into the school schedule. The ENL teacher will have additional time to meet with content area teachers to collaborate and develop scaffolding materials. Our ENL teacher attends professional development offered through the Queens North Field Support Center for ELLs. She has attended professional development around implementing the new CR Part 154 as well as ELL compliance. She will also attend instructional focused PD around the CCLS to turn-key to the staff. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ENL teacher is part of the school professional development committee. This way she can work with administration to ensure ELL professional development is provided to all staff throughout the school year. We provide ELL professional development to staff during monthly staff meetings and staff lunches. We also train staff in the NYCDOE over the phone interpretation to ensure all staff are equipped to contact parents. Our ENL teacher additionally provides staff with regular updates around new ELLs . Attendance is taken at all staff meetings and copies of the agenda are kept in the school office and with the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher also attends several outside Professional Developments with Queens North Field Support Center to ensure she receives 50% of her total hours in ELL-specific professional development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teacher conducts the yearly reviews with the ELL parents throughout the year and keeps a record of each parent meeting. She discusses with them changes to ELL services, based on their child's NYSESLAT score. Throughout the year, the ENL teacher regularly contacts parents to update them about upcoming school events, their child's progress etc. She keeps a log of all parent contact. She uses the NYCDOE phone interpretation when needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. SCHOOL-WIDE POLICY STATEMENT ADDRESSING THE SCHOOL’S PARENT INVOLVEMENT POLICY AND GOALS: Parents are the first educators of their children and indispensable partners with the school in meeting its goals for the academic, social, and emotional welfare of all children. TYWLS of Astoria supports parental involvement including parents of ELLs by encouraging meaningful participation in the life of the school through active involvement with the Parent Association, School Leadership Team, Title I parent meetings, Curriculum Night, Student-Led Conferences, Multicultural Day and all subcommittee meetings of all of these bodies. Translation services include: • DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit • Parent/School members-Translate letters sent home to ensure parents/guardians are aware of school activities and important information/dates The Principal is available on any morning by appointment as early as 7 am and as late as 6 pm in the evening. The Parent Association has an outreach plan to address the needs of all parents through class parent liaisons and interpreters. All 8  Student-Led Conferences have an evening component for parents who must work during the school day. It is the policy of the school that any parent can ask for and receive an appointment in a timely fashion with any member of the school community. Parent Coordinator works with parents of ELLs in small groups and individually to answer questions and act as liaison/interpreter/advocate. Parent involvement activities include: -Student-led conferences provides parents with the opportunity to take an active part in their child's education. -College visits promote college awareness and empower parents with a college experience that can be used to support their child's journey to college. -Multicultural Day celebrates diversity and embraces our differences. -ELL workshops provide valuable information around interventions, online grading system, content expectations, rights, available school and community support systems, course requirements, etc. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Allison Persad, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Young Women's Leadership S School DBN: 30Q286 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Allison Persad Title Principal Kimberly Castrillon Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Lindsey Corcoran ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Jackie Shendler / Humanities Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Meryem Ibrahim School Counselor Juan Mendez Gayathri Iyer Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other School Counselor Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/28/17 10/28/17 10/28/17 10/28/17 10/28/17 10/28/17 10/28/17 10/28/17 10/28/2017 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q286 School Name: The Young Women's Leadership School Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Corcoran ENL Coordinator Yes Yes conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Lindsey * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher use the I SPEAK cards to help parents communicate their preferred language when initially entering the school. The following tools are used to determine primary language spoken by each parent: -Home Language Identification Survey -Emergency Blue Card -ATS reports (RCPL) and (RAPL) 2  -Advisory Phone Calls These reports and records are updated regularly as well as a google document for teachers to easily access. Findings are documented on Emergency Blue Cards and ATS. Home Language Identification Surveys are filed in the Main Office. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese (any) Dari/Farsi/Persian Hindi Indonesian Italian Nepali English Pilipino (a.k.a. Tagalog) Punjabi (a.k.a. Panjabi) Spanish Tibetan Urdu 53 47 8 1 3 1 1 3 474 3 5 186 7 13 6.58 5.84 .99 .12 .37 .12 .12 .37 58.88 .37 .62 23.11 .87 1.61 53 48 6 1 3 1 1 3 469 3 5 189 8 13 6.58 5.96 .75 .12 .37 .12 .12 .37 58.26 .37 .62 23.48 .99 1.61 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. n/a Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 3  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Curriculum Night September After-School Tutoring Information October Student Led Conferences November School-Wide Intensives, alternative class scheduling December Regents Notices and Testing Dates January How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. LAC checks in with office staff first week of school to get the document and submit to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translated copies. Translated copies are then made by the office and given to the teacher/advisors based on parents' preferred language to distribute to their students. LAC checks in with office staff and teachers to get the document in the middle of September and submit to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translated copies. Translated copies are then made by the office and given to the teacher/advisors based on parents' preferred language to distribute to their students. LAC checks in with office staff in the middle of October to get the document and submit to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translated copies. Translated copies are then made by the office and given to the teacher/advisors based on parents' preferred language to distribute to their students. LAC checks in with Teacher Intensives Team in late November to get the document and submit to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translated copies. Translated copies are then made by the office and given to the teacher/advisors based on parents' preferred language to distribute to their students. LAC checks in with Testing Coordinator in the middle of December to get the document and submit to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translated copies. Also will use pre-translated documents from intranet. Translated copies are then made by the office and given to the teacher/advisors based on parents' preferred language to distribute to their students. 4  Middle School Testing Dates March NYSESLAT Notifications April Graduation Notifications and End of Year Information May Regents Notifications June LAC checks in with middle school Testing Coordinator in the middle of February to get the document and submit to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translated copies. Also will use pre-translated documents from intranet. Translated copies are then made by the office and given to the teacher/advisors based on parents' preferred language to distribute to their students. LAC checks in with ENL Coordinator in the middle of March to get the document and submit to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translated copies. Also will use pre-translated documents from intranet. Translated copies are then made by the office and given to the teacher/advisors based on parents' preferred language to distribute to their students. LAC checks in with guidance counsellor and school administration in the middle of April to get the document and submit to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translated copies. Translated copies are then made by the office and given to the teacher/advisors based on parents' preferred language to distribute to their students. LAC checks in with Testing Coordinator in the middle of May to get the document and submit to the Translation and Interpretation Unit for translated copies. Translated copies are then made by the office and given to the teacher/advisors based on parents' preferred language to distribute to their students. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September interpretation service(s)? School Staff interpreters are available in Arabic, Spanish, Bengali, Pilipino, 5  Student Led Conferences November, January, and May Phone Calls Home Ongoing Annual IEP Meetings Ongoing Hindi, Urdu, and Punjabi. If another language is needed, teachers can use the over-the-phone interpretation service. School Staff interpreters are available in Arabic, Spanish, Bengali, Pilipino, Hindi, Urdu, and Punjabi. If another language is needed, teachers can use the over-the-phone interpretation service. Teachers are trained by the LAC to use the over-the-phone interpretation service and are encouraged to save the number in their phones. Staff use this throughout the year and can identify the language needed for parents in the school Parent Contact Log. The IEP Team is also given access to the over-the-phone interpretation service and can use this when a staff member is not available to translate for parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, the school would use both staff members fluent in other languages to assist as well as the over-the-phone interpretation line to contact parents and notify them of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. School staff will be trained by the LAC to ensure they are aware of the goals of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Additionally they trained in how to use the over-the-phone interpretation service, a list of staff and languages they are available to interpret and the necessary procedures for document translation. The LAC will also show them the documents already available and translated on the DOE intranet. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 6   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) DETERMINATION of PRIMARY LANGUAGE -Parent/caregiver survey distributed during Grade Meetings to determine primary language spoken at home. -TYWLS of Astoria will maintain an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. This information will be maintained in ATS and on the Student Emergency Blue Card. OBLIGATION to PROVIDE LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES Provide translation/interpretation services to parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively during school meetings, conferences, activities as well as the DOE. TRANSLATION REQUIREMENTS -Centrally/Regionally Produced Communications-Timely distribution of these documents to parents/guardians that have been identified by the Translation and Interpretation Unit to contain information regarding their child’s education. For example: -Registration, application and selection. -Standards and performance. -Conduct, safety and discipline. -ELL/Special education and related services. -Transfers and discharges. School will provide parents/guardians whose primary language is a covered language with a translation of any document that contains individual, student-specific information, but not limited to a student’s -Bill of Rights and Responsibilities -Health -Safety -Legal/disciplinary matters -Entitlement to public education or placement in any special education ELL or non-standard academic program and -Permission slips/consent forms. When the Translation and Interpretation Unit, our school, or central/regional office is temporarily unable to provide required translation into one or two covered languages, we will provide a cover letter/notice on the face of the English document in the appropriate covered language(s), indicating how a parent can request free translation/interpretation of such document. 7  -School will hire a translator or ask for a volunteer (parent/staff member) to translate for parents during school meetings and one-on-one meetings. NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS -TYWLS of Astoria is responsible for providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who requires language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate covered languages, and instructions on how to obtain services. -TYWLS of Astoria will post in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages indicating the office/room where a copy of such written notification can be obtained. -TYWLS of Astoria’s Safety Plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the schools’ administration offices solely due to language barriers. Oral/written interpretation services posted in main office and lobby. TYWLS of Astoria where parents of more than 10% of the children that speak a primary language that is not a covered language, shall obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into such a language of the signage and forms required pursuant to this section and shall post and provide such forms in accordance with this section.DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit is used for oral translations. Additionally, many documents are already translated and available on the DOE intranet. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parent coordinator will regularly check with parents informally. Additionally we monitor our services to parents by checking the attendance of parents of all school functions and by asking for feedback from the parents. To this end, we have established an interactive box on the website so that parents can communicate at any time with the administration or the parent teachers association. Our parent coordinator will also work with the LAC to create a parent focus group to gather data from parents about the experience with translation and interpretation at our school. Parents will be asked to share their feedback and suggestions to help us continue to better serve parents in their preferred languages. 8 
