 27Q297 School Name: HAWTREE CREEK MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: MAUREEN HUSSEY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Hawtree Creek Middle School 27Q297 342700010297 6, 7, 8 School Number (DBN): 121-10 Rockaway Boulevard, South Ozone Park, NY 11420 718-659-3792 Phone Number: 718-659-3798 Fax: Dr. Maureen Hussey Mhussey2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Dr. Maureen Hussey Jennifer Marzano ElishaJohansen Dr. Maureen Hussey SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Stacey Williams MaricellisRomero District Information Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ms. JenniferAmbert Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11416 Jambert@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-348-2994 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Ms. Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director:   82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11419 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5839 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MariscellisRomero CBO Representative, if applicable RiyaChoon JuletteJohnson Member/ Member/ Member/ Parent  Name Dr. Maureen Hussey Jennifer Marzano ElishaJohansen Lynn Lowes Patricia Waithe *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools)  Name Despina Deluca Nicole Lucatuorto Alyson Parilla KristalSwanson John Geyer Alex Parker Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Guidance Counselor Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Hawtree Creek Middle School-MS 297, which opened in September 2013, will begin its sixth year. As a new small school, HCMS has experienced success in many areas and the goal is to sustain the school's areas of strength and continuously improve the school's areas of need.   HCMS places a strong focus on high school and college readiness which is articulated in the school’s mission statement: “Hawtree Creek Middle School students will graduate as leaders equipped with a set of skills and body of knowledge that can be applied and utilized in high school, college, and beyond.” To achieve this mission, the school is committed to developing specific character values and specific academic values in each student. Community, Leadership, Perseverance, and Collaboration are the character values embedded in the culture of HCMS. These values are highlighted through our Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) program, our "Student of the Month" program, the HCMS Behavior Honor Roll, and the newly implemented "Leader In Me" program. Research, Problem Solving, and Communication are the academic values embedded within daily instruction. Through the use of differentiated instruction, individual reflection, student-to-student dialogue, and justification of individual understanding and mastery, these academic values are developed and supported on a daily basis. These character and academic values are embedded through Advancement via Individual Determination (AVID), which is a research-based approach utilized to prepare students for the rigors of high school and college. AVID’s focus on writing, inquiry, collaboration, organization, and reading align perfectly with HCMS’ focus areas providing a clear path for instruction and learning. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The culmination of HCMS’ academic and behavior character values are showcased during Student-Led Conferences (SLC), held in December and May. During these conferences, students explain to their parents their learning process in each content area by providing evidence of understanding through a variety of work samples. Students also identify and explain the character trait(s) he/she exhibited while learning a skill or content. During SLC's in May 2018, 96% of HCMS parents participated in their child's SLC. In May 2018, graduating eighth graders presented a more cumulative and reflective Student-Led Conference in the form of a power-point presentation. 8th graders identified the content area in which they showed the most growth and the content area in which they were most successful. In addition, 8th graders shared a quote that described their journey through middle school and each student shared his/her plans for college. Partnerships & Initiatives HCMS implements Advancement Via Individual Determination (AVID) to further a school-wide college going culture. AVID embodies an educational philosophy that all students, specifically students in the academic middle, can and should be exposed to a college-going culture through the use of best instructional practices, the development of transferable skills, exposure to the “hidden curriculum”, college/university visits, and parent education. At HCMS the pillars of AVID: Writing, Inquiry, Collaboration, Organization, and Reading (WICOR) are aligned with the school's character and academic values, and are evident in each class. AVID is embedded within the school day through AVID advisory which takes place twice a week and collaborative study groups which take place once a week in math and ELA. For the 2018-2019 school year, Social Studies and science will begin the implementation of weekly collaborative study groups. 0  During their AVID advisory, students focus on the 5 pillars of AVID through a variety of activities and grade specific curricula. During AVID collaborative study groups, students identify a "point of confusion" on recent learning and engage in a collaborative peer group to help clarify the point of confusion. The academic skills acquired through the implementation of advisory and tutorials are transferable to high school and college. These academic skills not only prepare students for higher levels of work expected in high school and college, but they also prepare the student to be able to problem solve and advocate for themselves. Currently 50% of the staff is AVID trained through AVID's 3-day Summer Institute and AVID's 2-day Path Training. In addition to implementing AVID school-wide, HCMS was part of the initial pilot program for “College Access for All” and will continue to successfully implement the program throughout the 2018-2019 school year. This program provides college exposure for 7th grade students by organizing college trips and providing support for parent education sessions. To date, HCMS 7th and 8th graders have visited SUNY Maritime, CUNY-Bronx Community College, CUNY-Lehman College, CUNY-Queens College, Yale University, and CUNY-York College. The 2018-2019 school year will include trips to NYU, Columbia University, and Hunter College. HCMS was fortunate to partner with the non-profit organization, D.I.G. Farms, to begin a garden as a community service project led by the HCMS Student Council and National Junior Honor Society. D.I.G. Farms secured a $7000 grant from Lowes to transform an area right outside the entrance to the school into a community garden. Three local Lowes stores lent their expertise to revamping the outdoor gated area to include a compost, greenhouse, flower beds, vegetable gardens, grape vines, benches, and a pathway. Students meet with D.I.G. Farms Founder once a month to pick grown food, plant food, and cook recipes with ingredients from the garden. Students also had the opportunity to visit D.I.G. Farms, located in Westchester, NY, in May 2017. Ties to the community have been established through the support of Councilman Eric Ulrich who has visited HCMS several times. Three years ago Councilman Ulrich granted $100,000 in Reso-A funds to build a computer lab which was completed in April 2016. In 2016, he granted HCMS $450,000 in Reso-A funds to redesign the schoolyard and main entrance. The project took two years to complete and the new playground was completed this past August 27, 2018, in time for the opening of school. For the past three years, Councilman Ulrich has provided HCMS with a $20,000 grant to support a partnership with Midori & Friends, an organization that partners with schools to provide high quality, after school music education. This partnership provides HCMS the opportunity to offer various classes such as percussion/drum classes, Japanese culture class, and vocal/voice coaching to our students. For the 2018-2019 school year, HCMS will be implementing the "Leader in Me" program. This program is a comprehensive, evidence-based program that empowers students with leadership and life-skills. Implementation of the program stems from the collaboration and organization of the staff who create a mission, goals and and action for their expected outcome. HCMS's expected outcome is to enhance the already-strong student voice and student leadership within the school community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Populations Twenty-four percent of the school’s population have an IEP and are served in either a 12:1:1 class, an ICT class, or a SETTS class. The specific needs of our SPED students vary and in efforts to meet these various needs teachers follow what is mandated in each child’s IEP. Teachers provide differentiated instruction aligned to Common Core standards and content, and provide additional support and help on a case by case basis. In efforts to ensure that students are engaged in rigorous instruction, SPED teachers are supported by content-area teachers and vice versa using a push-in model in all classes. Content area teachers and SPED teachers engage in a consistent amount of collaboration and common planning to ensure that each class implements a co-teaching model so that students are exposed to the 1  same content and instructional approaches as General Education students. in addition, resource room/support will be provided during the school day for students who need more one-on-one or small group support. The ENL population at HCMS has grown from one ENL student to 25 ENL students, of varying levels, in five years. The ENL teachers use a combination of the push-in model to support students in their content areas and pull-out model to focus on development of specific skills. Like Special Education, bilingual education strives to meet the needs of each student through consistent implementation of scaffolded differentiated instruction. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools HCMS has made great progress in two areas of the Framework for Great Schools. The first area where the school made progress was “Rigorous Instruction.” Based on a school-wide needs assessment and a recommendation made during the 2015 Quality Review, a school-wide writing program was implemented during the 2015-2016 school year. Over the past three years, teachers have received yearly training in "Step Up to Writing". The program provides teachers with a structured approach to teaching paragraph and essay writing. Implementation of this program across all content areas provides a level of consistency in how HCMS teachers approach writing instruction; it provides a common language for the school community; and the program immediately improved students’ ability to construct a 5-sentence paragraph. ELA State test scores have increased 35% over the past four years. The second area where HCMS experienced progress was “Collaborative Teachers." During the 2017-2018 school year, The ELA Department created a plan to implement a year-long Independent reading program. Students were expected to read 6 novels independently (1 novel for each of the first two quarters and 2 novels for each of the last two quarters) and submit required journal entries through EdModo, an online discussion space. To support students' independent reading, the ELA department carved out 30 minutes a week (two fifteen minute periods) in their ELA schedule for quiet reading. In their efforts to enhance the school's reading culture, the ELA Department enlisted the help of the entire staff to brainstorm various ways teachers could support the independent reading program. AS a result, teachers on each grade level opened their room at lunch various times during the week as quiet spaces to read. The P.E. teacher began a "Read to Run" program where students came in before school on Thursday morning for Quiet Reading which earned them free time in the gym before school started on Friday morning. Book clubs were started during elective and after school. Lastly, one teacher began a novel sharing program between grades where older students would visit the classrooms of younger students and share out the latest and/or most favorite novels students were reading. Tracking of Lexile levels at the beginning and end of last year show growth in individual student reading levels. Focus Areas While data collection can be considered an area of progress, we will continue to make it a focus area because we consider data collection to be a work in progress To date, teachers and departments have created solid cycles of daily and unit formative and summative assessments. This allows teachers to determine student progress and mastery over the course of a unit. State test data is disaggregated in a variety of ways with the help of DataCorp. The staff has taken part in professional development framed around analyzing state test cores, Regents scores, 8th grade science test scores, and post assessments. In department teams, teachers determined areas of need and areas of strength. From here departments create a SMART goal and an essential question to guide their area of focus work for the upcoming school year. Each department will continue to compile data using the same excel sheet, making the process of data collection more streamlined across each department and across the school. Information from collecting data will better inform what standards teachers should focus on when planning. This information will also drive the instructional focus areas of the school's extended day program on Wednesday and Thursday and during Saturday Academy. As a result of analyzing areas of strength and weaknesses through data disaggregation last year, teacher were able to focus on specific areas of instruction. This, in turn, resulted in an 11% increase in ELA State Test scores 2  and a 9% increase in math state test scores. By continuing to analyze data the goal for he 2018-2019 school year is to increase ELA State Test scores by 5% and increase math state test scores by 10%. The second area of focus will be consistent and effective implementation of the AVID program. Since HCMS is implementing AVID school-wide, the AVID Site team has decided to focus on student organization for the 2018-2019 school year. This includes maintaining an organized AVID binder, daily use of the school agenda, and consistent practice and use of Effective Cornell Notes. This will be accomplished through a collaborative effort on behalf of the AVID advisory teachers and the content areas teachers. For example, AVID advisory teachers are implementing a binder rubric that students and teachers can use to monitor organization. Content area teachers modified the binder rubric specific to their subject area in order to monitor organization of each section of a student's AVID binder. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q297 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 366 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 30 30 5 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 10 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 85.0% % Reduced Lunch 4.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 10.7% % Black or African American 20.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 0% 41% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 45.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged YES YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS YES NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 41 40 92.9% 6.6% 20.5% 34.7% 32.2% 11.2% 2 33% 3.4 22.4% 52% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES NO NO N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The priority need in conjunction with Rigorous Instruction is the continuation of the implementation of the school's independent reading program. In order to build sustainability and consistency with the independent reading program, and continue to positively change the reading culture of the school, the staff, led by the ELA Department, will continue to implement a variety of approaches to encourage and motivate students to read on their own. School’s strengths relative to Rigorous Instruction ● Common Core aligned ELA curriculum that includes the completion of two novels per grade each year in ELA class. ● Up-to-date novel libraries in each ELA classroom. Trade book libraries in each science and Social Studies classroom. ● "Celebration of Reading" Week to provide opportunities to purchase novels, hear authors speak, and engage in activities to promote independent reaching such as the annual "Read-In." School’s needs relative to Rigorous Instruction: ● Continue to create a school culture that encourages a love of reading, supports independent reading and readers, and recognizes the success of students who read consistently. ● Provide teachers with the resources they may need: updated classroom libraries, multiple copies of the same text, appropriate furniture to display novels. ● Maintain an independent reading plan that provides students with dates and parameters to model and guide time frames for completion of each novel. ● Use common planning and department meetings to create lessons to introduce/engage students in how to choose their own independent reading novel and to create performance based assessments upon completion of a novel. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019, 90% of HCMS students will independently complete 6 novels. Students' Lexile levels will be assessed in October and monitored in February and June to movement/progress in reading scores. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Create opportunities for access to a wide genre of novels through the use of classroom library, public library, book sales at school. All students Sept. 2018 through June 2019 ELA teachers, AVID Advisory teachers, Special Ed teachers, ENL teachers. * Create a pacing calendar for each quarter that provides students and teachers with specific dates that novels should be completed and specific dates journal entries are due during the course of the novel. ● On specific dates outlined in the pacing calendar (for each novel), students will submit 6 online journals to EdModo to measure understanding of content. ● Implement and schedule 20 minutes of quiet reading twice a week during 2 of the 8 ELA class periods. ● During Quiet Reading, teachers will conference with and use a line of questioning to determine understanding of the novel the student is reading. ● Teachers will create a menu of performance-based assessments that students can chose from upon completion of each novel. ● Utilize Grade Level community meetings to celebrate independent readers each quarter, share recommendations for novels, and enhance the reading culture at HCMS. ● Ensure that all staff members are independently reading as well and provide opportunities for teachers to share their favorite novels. ● Create smaller book groups (Literature Circles) to include 3-4 students and a paraprofessional so students have support while reading the book. All teachers Sept. 2018-Sept. 2019 ● Schedule Quiet Reading time 2x a week during ELA and/or SS. Special Education Teachers, ELL teachers, General Ed Teachers, Paraprofessionals 7  ● Use "pull out" time to conference with students, follow/review the pacing chart, read in small groups. ● Common Core Information Night for ELA & Math ● Create a Student/Parent Book Club to teach parents how to engage in a novel with their child. ● Sponsor a Family Reading Night to engage families in independent reading. ● "Celebration of Reading" Week ● Sponsor Scholastic Book Nights (Fall and Spring) so parents and have a place to purchase novels throughout the year. ● Syllabi sent home to parents at the beginning of the year and each quarter that outlines the pacing chart and expectations for independent reading.. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement parents and students Sept. 2018-Sept. 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator Department Leads Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. HCMS teachers and staff will implement the following: ● Common Core Information Night for ELA & Math - October 2018. Facilitated by the ELA and Math Departments. The purpose is to 1.) Update the parents on the results of th 2018 ELA and Math test scores; 2.) Give parents information and resources to help them assist their child with math and ELA work/expectations; and 3.) Educate the parents on the importance of independent reading and the impact it has on student performance across all content areas. ● Engage parents by use various forms of communication (meetings, website, REMIND) to inform and update parents about the independent reading program. ● Create a Student/Parent Book Club to teach parents how to engage in a novel with their child. ● Sponsor a Family Reading Night to engage families in independent reading. ● "Celebration of Reading" Week - November 2018 - facilitated by the Assistant Principal and committee (Purpose: to engage students and parents in a variety of activities that promote reading and a love of reading.) ● Sponsor Scholastic Book Nights (Fall and Spring) so parents and have a place to purchase novels throughout the year. ● Syllabi sent home to parents at the beginning of the year and each quarter that outlines the pacing chart and expectations for independent reading.. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per session to pay teachers to facilitate parent meetings outside of the regular work day. ● Collaborative scheduling with teachers and parent coordinator to create a "parent education calendar." ● Monies/funds set aside for classroom libraries and to continually update classroom libraries. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will have completed 2 independent reading novels as evidence by the quarterly teacher tracker, online journal entries, and final project based assessment. Lexile levels will be tested in October, February and June to measure growth in reading levels. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The overall unit of measure will be the reading portion of the 2019 ELA State Test given in May. Lexile levels will be monitored 3 times a year. Journal entries will be submitted throughout the novel. Performance based assessments will be given at the end end of each novel. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The priority need in conjunction with Supportive Environment is to strengthen the student organizational aspects of the school-wide AVID Program. The AVID advisory supports an academic classroom and school culture by promoting the philosophy that ALL students can achieve, given the appropriate support. After an assessment of the effectiveness of the AVID program, the AVID Site Team determined that student organization was an area of need for the majority of students. This includes organization and maintenance of each student's AVID binder and consistent use of the HCMS agenda. Teachers realized that specific progress monitoring structures need to be in place to effectively track organization of AVID resources for teachers and for students. School's strengths relative to this needs assessment: * All students have AVID Advisory twice a week. * Incoming 6th Graders attend New Student Orientation in August where they learn how to set up their AVID binder, utilize their agenda, and take Cornell Notes. * Students have weekly AVID Binder checks during AVID Advisory and content area classes. * All teachers utilize the AVID Binder and the agenda. School's needs relative to this needs assessment: * More detail needs to be paid to AVID binder expectations and agenda expectations. * AVID Binder accountability needs to take place in the AVID Advisory and then followed through in all content area classes. * Teachers and students need a uniform rubric to measure organization of the AVID Binder. * Teachers and students need a checklist to keep track of what is in the AVID Binder. * Teachers need to model what is written in the student agenda. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 0  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, HCMS students will increase their organization skills by maintaining a timely and current AVID Binder through the daily use of their AVID Binder and student agenda. Students and teachers will incorporate the use of a binder and agenda rubric to ensure organization on a weekly basis, and teachers and students will keep track of weekly scores using an AVID Tracker. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? * The yearly AVID goal also serves as a 2018-2019 CEP goal. all students August * Monthly AVID Site Team meetings * Bi-monthly Department meetings * Bi-monthly Grade Level meetings * AVID training/PD at AVID 3-day Conference each July * AVID training/PD at 2-day Path Trainings during the course of the school year. * Include AVID progress during Student-Led Conference twice a year. * Continued participation in "College Access for All" pilot program to continue to promote a school-wide college going culture * Special Ed Teachers and ENL teachers serve on the AVID Site Team 2018-June 2019 all students August 2018- June 2019 * Special Ed and ENL teachers will incorporate AVID skills (binders/agenda) in student's IEP/goals/Student-Led Conferences * Parents serve on the AVID Site Team all students August 2018-June 2019 * Parent AVID Education NIght * "Visit your Child's AVID Class" visitation day * Parent workshops around high school and college readiness 3b – Parent and Family Engagement AVID Advisory teachers, content area teachers, Guidance Counselor, Administration Special Ed Teachers, AVID Advisory Teachers ENL teachers AVID Advisory teachers, Guidance Counselor, Principal 2  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. * Parents will serve on the AVID Site Team that will meet twice a semester and facilitated by the Principal and AVID teachers. * AVID Night - November 2017: to educate parents on the pillars of AVID, inquiry, binder checks/organization. Facilitated by students and the AVID teachers. * High School and College Planning Nights - June 2017, October 2017, January 2018: to educate parents about the high school admission process and the college admission process. Facilitated by the Guidance Counselor and "College Access for All" Staff. * Visit Your Child's Classroom" Days: October 2017, November 2017, February 2018, March 2018, May 2018. Facilitated by classroom teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. * Providing substitutes for an "off-site" AVID training * Master schedule to include AVID Advisory for all students * Common planning, Department meeting in the master schedule * Per session provided for AVID Site Team meetings after the contractual school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers and students will use a weekly binder tracker and an agenda tracker to ensure that both are being used effectively on a daily basis. Teachers will elicit student feedback at the end of each quarter (November, February, April, June) when students complete a AVID progress/grade reflection sheet. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. AVID Binder Rubric; Rubric Score Tracker; Quarterly Reflections; end of year AVID Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. With the addition of 8 new teachers to the HCMS staff for the 2018-2019 school year, it is imperative that the goals guided by the mission and vision are maintained. Through school-wide professional development prior to school opening, new teachers will engage in professional development around the 8 Danielson Indicators and the Danielson Rubric. Several instructional expectations such as differentiated instruction, student dialogue and discourse, levels of questioning, student-led classrooms overlap with several other Indicators (1A, 1E, 3C, 3D), Indicator 3C (cognitive engagement) will be a focus area for the upcoming school year. School’s strengths in response to Collaborative Teachers: ● Embedded Professional Development which includes: o Weekly Check-ins with teachers o Daily common planning time o Weekly Department meetings o Weekly Grade level meetings o Cycles of Peer Observations which allows teachers to learn from each other * Informal and formal mentoring partnerships that are set up for teachers. o Individual Reflection to enable teachers to engage in a cycle of “plan, teach, assess, reflect”. o School’s needs in response to Collaborative Teachers ● Continue to develop Indicator 3C in teachers as a way to leverage highly effective practices in the classroom and across grades. ● Continue to build leadership capacity to maintain collegiality, develop autonomy at grade and department level, and further instructional goals. 4  * Varying levels of teacher pedagogy indicated by assessments of informal observations revealed a need for specific focus on effective and consistent instruction. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of the teaching staff will achieve one level of improvement in Indicator 3C (from “developing” to “effective”) OR maintain a level of “effective” in Indicator 3C if previously achieved. 25% of teaching staff will achieve one level of improvement from “Effective” to “Highly Effective” in Indicator 3C. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, teachers, teacher mentors ● PD framed around the Danielson Rubric and Indicator 3C 28 teachers ● Three Cycles of Peer Observations between October 2018 and June 2019 ● Three Cycles of Individual Reflections between October 2018 and June 2019 ● Teachers participation in school-based PD, facilitated by lead teachers) that analyzes the Danielson rubric in order to construct individual goals. ● Teachers participation in an Initial Planning Conference at the beginning of the school year to discuss individual goals and create a plan as to how those goals will be met and what evidence will be provided. ● Weekly individual teacher check-ins provides teachers with one-on-one time and differentiated professional development that addresses individual modifications to practice. ● Weekly common planning to assist teachers in lesson planning and curriculum planning. ● School-based embedded PD framed around teacher needs based on informal observations and individual goals. ● Teachers are provided with monthly “Instructional Non-Negotiables” (scaffolded instructional expectations that include: accountable talk, Cornell Note-taking, Inquiry, Student Dialogue, Process of Learning boards, Student-Led Conferences) to guide teachers in prioritizing school-wide instructional initiatives. ● Principal has “open-door policy” to work with teachers, provide guidance, feedback, and support when needed. 6 ● Teachers will continue to research, discuss, implement different approaches and strategies within differentiated instruction to meet the needs of all students. ● Co-teaching protocols will be implemented in classrooms of students with disabilities and English Language Learners to ensure all students will have ample support in achieving the goal. ● Common planning for content area teachers, Special Ed teachers and ENL teachers to allow for additional lesson planning and collaboration to ensure all mandates are met and to make sure there is consistency in teaching and instruction throughout all classrooms. ● ENL support will consist of, both, push-in and pull-out models to ensure students are receiving appropriate groups and individual support. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Special Ed Teachers, ELL teachers Teachers who utilize co-teaching model: General Ed teachers, Special Ed Teachers, and ENL teachers all students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator ● Student-Led Conferences in December and June: facilitated by students; organized by teachers. ● Visit Your Child's Classroom" Days: October 2018, November 2018, February 2019, March 2019, May 2019. Facilitated by classroom teachers. ●Possible Parent Workshop on “Academic Conversations with your Child” ● Providing parents with guiding questions during class visits, Parent/Teacher Conferences, and Student-Led Conferences AVID site Coordinator Teachers Guidance Counselor Principal Department Leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. ● Student-Led Conferences in December and June: facilitated by students; organized by teachers. ● Visit Your Child's Classroom" Days: October 2018, November 2018, February 2019, March 2019, May 2019. Facilitated by classroom teachers. ●Parent Workshop on “Academic Conversations with your Child” ● Providing parents with guiding questions during class visits, Parent/Teacher Conferences, and Student-Led Conferences Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 7  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Substitutes for Peer Observations and/or Instructional Rounds ● Additional Per session for Professional Development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will engage in 3 Peer Cycles of Observation in October, Jan thru March, and May. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. * The Danielson Rubric will be used to assess teachers overall. * The quantifiable mid-point benchmark will be the January thru February Cycles of Observation and Reflection. Teachers will use a rubric based on Danielson's Indicator 3C: Cognitive Engagement to observe teachers . Those observed and those doing the observing will engage in lesson debriefs with colleagues. * in May, teachers will utilize the content specific Hess' Cognitive Rigor Matrix to observe cognitive engagement. Teachers will engage in lesson debriefs following the classroom visits Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In efforts to sustain the already existing collegial and professional school culture at HCMS, instructional teams will be maintained as new teachers are added in order to develop autonomy at the grade and department level. Building strong instructional teams is part of the vision and goals of the school. The need for consistent instructional teams is based upon the vision of developing autonomy within teacher teams by utilizing the skill set and expertise of teachers as the staff continues to grow. Examples of instructional teams created this year are the AVID Site Team, Instructional Cabinet, and Grade Level Lead Team. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of the NEW teaching staff will achieve a level of effective in Indicator 4E. By June 2019, 100% of RETURNING teachers will achieve one level of improvement (from “developing” to “effective” or “effective “ to “highly effective”) OR maintain a level of “effective” in Indicator 4E if previously achieved at HCMS during the 2016-2017 school year. Teachers will be assessed using the Danielson Rubric in the area of 4E that specifically address “seeking regular opportunities for continued professional development” and welcoming colleagues and supervisors into the classroom for the purpose of gaining insight from their feedback”. In addition, minutes, agendas, goals, informal observations, cycles of reflection will all be *evidence of the collaborative work and goals teachers are engaged in. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Mentors Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). *Continued embedded professional development that includes check-ins, weekly meetings, daily common planning, individual and collective professional development framed around the mission and vision of the school. * 3 cycles of observation and reflection. * Informal classroom visits by teachers & opportunities for informal professional conversations/debriefs with their colleagues * Weekly department meetings and grade level meetings where teacher teams determine goals based on needs assessment in department and within grade. * Continued professional development around analyzing student work and disaggregating data. * PD around the use of protocols to guide the work of instructional teams. *Implementation of Instructional Rounds that identify a "problem of practice" within each department * Provide PD on the 6 co-teaching models to increase effectiveness of all teachers in the classroom - this will include Paraprofessionals as well. ENL and SPED teachers * Common planning for content area teachers, Special Ed teachers and ENL teachers to allow for additional lesson planning and collaboration to ensure all mandates are met and to make sure there is consistency in teaching and instruction throughout all classrooms. * ENL support will consist of, both, push-in and pull-out models to ensure students are receiving appropriate groups and individual support. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers Para-Professionals Principal 0 * Classroom Visitation Days in all content areas: October 2018, November 2018, March 2019, April 2019. Facilitated by Parent Coordinator and teachers. all students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal Teachers * Parent engagement in the Student-Led Conference process: December 2018 and June 2019. Facilitated by students and organized by teachers. * Parent feedback through the use of survey and reflections after class visits and SLC's. Dates listed above. Department Leads AVID teachers Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. * Classroom Visitation Days in all content areas: October 2018, November 2018, March 2019, April 2019. Facilitated by Parent Coordinator and teachers. * Parent engagement in the Student-Led Conference process: December 2018 and June 2019. Facilitated by students and organized by teachers. * Parent feedback through the use of survey and reflections after class visits and SLC's. Dates listed above. Facilitated by the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for substitutes or paid coverages when conducting inter-visitations. Per session for additional common planning time. Funds to purchase research-based materials that support PD of teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will be assessed using the Danielson Rubric in the area of 4E that specifically address “seeking regular opportunities for continued professional development” and welcoming colleagues and supervisors into the classroom for the purpose of gaining insight from their feedback” through 3 Cycles of Teacher Observations and Reflection. These will take place in October, February and May/June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1  The Danielson Rubric will be the tool used for assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A needs assessment revealed the need to provide consistent opportunities for parents to engage in the school community in a variety of ways (academic, fundraising, social). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, HCMS will conduct ten events (monthly) planned to enhance Strong Family and Community Ties. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). * Volunteer opportunities for parents HCMS August 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, PA President, teachers * Calendar of monthly parent events * Weekly Reminders sent to parents parent population * Use of REMIND/Facebook/school website * Monthly meetings with Executive Board of Parents' Association * Open House and Tours for perspective 6th grade parents * Monthly PD for Guidance Counselor and Parent Coordinator * Planning parent activities during the school day and at night * listed above * listed above August 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, PA President, teachers August 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, PA President, teachers HCMS parent population HCMS parent population 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. * College Access for All * Greater Ridgewood Youth Council (GRYC) * AVID * Midori & Friends Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. * Funds for the purchase food for parent meetings and school visitation days. * Schedule monthly meeting time with Parent Association Executive Board Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● Compare and contrast attendance rates to previous year's events ● Monthly assessment of parent attendance Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ● Learning Environment Survey ● Sign-in sheets to track percentage of parent attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Previous year’s state test scores, % growth in MOSL test scores from the beginning of the year to the end of the year, Unit data, conferencing, homework completion rate, attendance trends. Previous year’s state test scores, % growth in MOSL test scores from the beginning of the year to the end of the year, Unit data, conferencing, homework completion rate, attendance trends. Previous year’s state test scores, % growth in MOSL test scores from the beginning of the year to the end of the year, Unit data, conferencing, homework completion rate, attendance trends. Previous year’s state test scores, % growth in MOSL test scores from the beginning of the year to the end of Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reteach of class lesson/skill based, test review, conferencing, writing process, homework completion Reteach of lesson/skill based, class review, test review, problem solving, conferencing, homework completion Reteach of lesson/skill based, class review, test review, problem solving, conferencing, homework completion Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group instruction, one on one tutoring, Small group instruction, one on one tutoring, Small group instruction, one on one tutoring, Extended day program (after school), during lunch, during elective, Saturday Academy, Extended day program (after school), during lunch, during elective, Saturday Academy, Extended day program (after school), during lunch, during elective, Saturday Academy, Reteach of lesson/skill or content based, class review, test review, DBQ preparation and Small group instruction, one on one tutoring, Extended day program (after school), during lunch, during 6  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) completion, conferencing, homework completion Social/emotional guidance, academic guidance, college and career readiness, parent education the year, Unit data, conferencing, homework completion rate, attendance trends. IEP mandates, students in crisis, parent conferences and recommendations, teacher conferences and recommendations elective, Saturday Academy, Small group, one on one counseling, advisory, meetings During the school day, after school 7  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 18 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Transportation School uniforms At-risk counseling Academic Support After School Services Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 0 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 8  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 9  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment ● Review Open Market, New Teacher Finder, and attend DOE hiring fairs. ● Connect with potential candidates through Borough Field Office human resources manager. ● New hires will be appropriately licensed for the position they will serve. Whenever possible, new hires will be dually licensed in a content area and special education. ● Recommendations from current staff Retention ● Mentorships ● Individual weekly check-in meetings with principal to discuss goals, plans, concerns, strategies, and ways to improve teacher practice. ● Embedded professional development that is differentiated to fit the needs of each teacher and includes common planning, weekly PD, peer observations. ● External professional development provided by outside organizations such as ASCD, AVID, and Ramapo Children’s Center ● Provide qualified staff with opportunities to develop capabilities for future administrative roles. ● Development of a collegial, collaborative and professional community. ● Maintain an open door policy. 0  Assignments/Programming ● Master scheduling that includes daily common planning for teacher collaboration * Master scheduling that includes Weekly Check-In time for teachers with the principal and assistant principal ● Reduced class size in testing subjects by hiring two math and two ELA teachers. Support ● Maintain documentation for Highly Qualified Teachers to remain professionally certified ● Secretary and Principal will work closely with the network HR person to ensure that teachers who are not highly qualified meet all deadlines and required documentation. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Principal and Assistant Principal provide weekly PD that engages teachers in new learning and best practices to support implementation of goal. ● Principal and Assistant Principal meet weekly with individual teachers to provide one-on-one instructional support and differentiate teacher’s professional development. ● Principal meets weekly with each department to engage in common planning around curriculum mapping; analyzing daily, weekly and unit data; and looking at student work. * Assistant Principal provides PD for new teachers through a New Teacher Co-hort that meets bi-monthly ● School-based embedded PD which includes: weekly PD, common planning time, weekly department meetings, individual check in time with teachers, peer observations, cycles of “reflection to action” for each teacher, external PD aligned with school’s mission and vision (Danielson, AVID, Step Up To Writing, ASCD). ● Turnkey training around writing, inquiry, reading, collaboration, and student organization that teachers received at the AVID Summer Conference over the past two summers Teachers took part in school-based PD that analyzed the Danielson rubric in order to construct individual goals. ● Teachers met individually with principal to discuss individual goals and create a plan as to how those goals will be met and what evidence will be provided. ● Weekly common planning to assist teachers in lesson planning and curriculum planning that will address the school’s mission/vision and the Danielson Framework. ● School-based embedded PD framed around teacher needs based on informal observations and individual goals. ● Providing teachers with monthly “Instructional Non-Negotiables” (scaffolded instructional expectations) to guide teachers in implementing school-wide instructional priorities). ● Collaboration with talent coach to support the implementation of the Advance System. 1  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Resources would support the implementation of an after-school AIS program offered twice a week from November through May, plus the implementation of Saturday Academy that will be offered 10 consecutive Saturdays from January through March. Students would receive consistent weekly support provided by their content area teachers after the school day ends. In addition, students would receive consumable materials aligned with the curriculum in each of these programs. Data on student growth will be tracked to ensure that students are achieving mastery in deficient areas. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). The TA Program would be implemented as additional support to the regular school day instructional program and it would be aligned with the rigorous Common Core Curriculum offered in order to provide students with additional supports in specific areas. In addition, curriculum would be differentiated as it is during the school day using the same strategies and approaches utilized in students' daily lessons. This would eliminate removing students from the classroom during the regular school day. Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Summer PD on Common Core Standards, Danielson and MOSL provides teachers with information to make informed decisions on content area specific assessment to be given. ● PD is provided on creating CCLS aligned curriculum and assessments that provide teachers with specific information to make informed instructional decisions. ● Daily common planning and weekly teacher check-ins allow teachers and principal to discuss best practices in daily/unit assessments and discuss preparation and effective lesson planning for standardized assessments. 2  ● Weekly PD addresses compiling data, using that data to make informed decisions, the use of protocols to analyze student work. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 3   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Hawtree Creek Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Hawtree Creek Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● Over the 2016-17 year, guidance counselor will create a calendar to provide parents with various educational information through our "Parents as Partners" workshops which will take place on a monthly basis. Day and evening sessions will be provided in order to accommodate all parents. Topics will include bullying, cyber-bullying, effectively communicating with your child and organizational skills. ● HCMS Parent Coordinator will serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. Inform parents of school involvement plan via HCMS website, back-to-school night, open houses, School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings, and parent communication system. ● Provide parents with opportunities to give input and suggestions of the school plan throughout the school year at Parents’ Association meetings, Parent Breakfasts, and SLT meetings. 5  ● Provide parent information breakfast/night regarding Common Core Instruction/How Can I help My Child with Homework/Math/ELA. ● Provide, whenever possible, pertinent school information in the parents' primary language. ● Provide each parent/guardian with a copy of their student’s progress report on a quarterly basis. ● Provide communication and opportunities for all parents interested in volunteering: “International Night”, monthly student celebrations, school dances, Scholastic Book Fairs, bake sales. Please contact Parent Coordinator. ● Provide school events at a variety of times. ● Conduct parent surveys at least times a year requesting parental input. ● Utilize a variety of communication techniques to enhance parent participation (website, emails, phone, and mail). ● Provide opportunities to evaluate and identify cultural barriers to successful parental involvement via phone calls, website, surveys, Parent Workshops, and Parents’ Association meetings. ● Provide opportunities for community–based organizations and businesses to support HCMS and parent involvement (inviting members of NYC Council, District 27 Superintendent and District 27 Family Advocate, and local businesses). ● Provide assistance to parents in understanding such topics as the NYSED and NYSITELL exams. ● Hold an annual SLT meeting to inform parents of their school’s participation in the Title I Program and its requirements. ● Provide parents with the opportunity to visit classes throughout the year and in engage in actual lessons with their child, (“HCMS Parent Classroom Visit/Participation”) ● Host a "Career Day" which would include engaging parents in the community to present to students different career opportunities. Parents, student's siblings/relatives and friends of community would share their educational background, job training, skills and daily responsibilities involved in their careers/occupation to aid in post-secondary readiness. ● Provide parents with training to navigate the following systems: Skedula, Facebook, REMIND, and School Messenger. Parents will increase communication with school by having access to each of these online communication tools. ● Provide parents with an opportunity to create a comfortable space at school that is accessible to all parents, supervised by PA. Parents will have access to phone and computer to assist with organizing any projects related to school and parent involvement. 6  ● Provide parents with opportunities to participate in their child's learning by chaperoning trips that take place within our community and outside so that they may share in their child's learning. As well as participate in "Visit Your Child's Classroom" by joining in on their child's Math/ELA/Science classes. Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● Conduct parent surveys at least three times a year requesting parental input. ● Provide parents with an opportunity to create a comfortable space at school that is accessible to all parents, supervised by PTA. Parents will have access to phone and computer to assist with organizing any projects related to school and parent involvement. ● Provide opportunities to evaluate and identify cultural barriers to successful parental involvement via phone calls, website, surveys, Parent Workshops, and Parents’ Association meetings. ● Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 7  ● Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the No Child Left Behind Act; ● Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● Supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Area; instructional materials for parents; ● Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● Distributing content area syllabi, Weekly Parent Reminders, and Quarterly Progress Reports designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Hawtree Creek Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 8  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● Using academic learning time efficiently; ● Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● Arranging additional meetings (Student-Led Conferences, IEP’s) at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● Provide parents with weekly correspondence informing them of family events, meetings, workshops via e mail, mailings and school website. 9  ● Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 0  ● Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● Always try my best to learn. III. Student Responsibilities ● Attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● Show respect for myself, other people and property; ● Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Read at least 20 minutes every day outside of school time. 1  ● Give to my parents or the adult who is responsible for my welfare all notices and information received by me from my school. * Adhere to the discipline code. ● Uphold a high standard of citizenship. ● To display our character values daily. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Hawtree Creek Middle School Borough Queens School Number 297 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Maureen Hussey Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Shauna MuncanJanine Manfredi Teacher/Subject Area Alyson Parilla - ELA Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider Jane Seidemann Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Alex parker Coach n/a School Counselor Despina DeLuca Parent n/a Parent Coordinator Stacy Williams Field Support Center Staff Member Josh Metz Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 379 3 Total number of ELLs 17 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.49%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools our school uses to assess literacy skills of English Language Learners (ELLs) are teacher-created assessments such as Exit Slips, Quick-writes and Checks For Understanding (CFUs), which are delivered in a daily lesson and embedded into the curriculum. This year we will introduce the literacy program Achieve 3000 which will assesses student's reading comprehension throughout the school year and will determine their reading level through text difficulty and reader ability on the same scale. The literacy levels of our current ELLs range from 3rd grade to 7th grade. The LAB-R is also given in Spanish and the NYSITELL in English to our newcomers. It provides us with initial data regarding early literacy skills in all modalities. We place students in classes based on the results. Teachers use this data to differentiate instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 4  Teachers collaborate on a weekly basis through school-wide, grade-level and department-level meetings. Common planning time is also embedded into each teacher's schedule as an additional way for teachers to plan appropriate assessments for the ELL students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In the past, we have used the Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) exams to identify baseline, progress and areas of need. This year we will be using a different NYC performance test to assess our students. We also continue to use the ELL Periodic Assessment as well as teacher created assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Based on the data generated from the summative assessments, students are grouped in a combination of readiness groups and mixed ability groups, depending on the lesson of the day. These types of groups allow for small group instruction as well as peer-to-peer support. Teachers also conference with students to address their areas of need. Collaboration with other content-area teachers is also important so that students' needs are being met in all subject areas. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data gathered from NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state test scores are used to evaluate and inform the ELL programs at Hawtree Creek Middle School. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the school year, the English as a New Language (ENL) Coordinator reviews the ELL reports from ATS that show the number of ELLs for the incoming school year, their proficiency levels and their state test scores. Based on this information, the ENL Coordinator collaborates with the Assistant Principal to determine the most appropriate classroom placement for each student in compliance with CR Part 154 Regulations. This ensures each student receives the mandated number of minutes of ENL instruction, whether it be in a stand-alone or integrated setting. There are two certified ENL teachers at Hawtree Creek Middle School. In the ENL program, ELLs are serviced by an ENL certified teacher via a push-in or stand-alone model. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive eight periods (360 minutes) of instruction by a certified ENL teacher in a combination of stand alone and push-in model. Transitioning and Advanced ELLs receive four periods (180 minutes) of instruction by a push-in ENL teacher. To the extent possible, the ENL teacher pushes in to the ELA and Social Studies classroom. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In the ENL program, the instructional model is a combination of stand alone and the push-in/co-teaching model. All classes are departmentalized and students move from room to room with their class. For true beginner ELLs and 5  Transition ELLs, they receive the required units of pull-out per week. Students are grouped by grade and are heterogeneously grouped by proficiency level to the extent possible. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? There are two certified ENL teachers at Hawtree Creek Middle School. In the ENL program, ELLs are serviced by an ENL certified teacher via a push-in model. Entering and Emerging ELLs receive eight periods (360 minutes) of instruction by a certified ENL teacher in a combination of stand alone and push-in model. Transitioning and Advanced ELLs receive four periods (180 minutes) of instruction by a push-in ENL teacher. To the extent possible, the ENL teacher pushes in to the ELA and Social Studies classroom. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the ENL program model, grade-level content is delivered in English with native language support. ENL teachers provide students with native language glossaries and dictionaries, and if available, with native language texts and readings. We currently have resources in Spanish, Arabic and Punjabi and provide on the spot support with vocabulary and comprehension development. The school uses a workshop model for all content areas aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teachers use the same model and modify when necessary. Content and ENL teachers are encouraged to plan collaboratively to the extent possible during common planning periods. All teachers use Inquiry Team methods to analyze data to drive their instruction. Teachers are aware of the ELLs in their classes and discuss the needs of the ELLs in their classes at team meetings. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To the extent possible and in languages spoken by our staff, the initial evaluation is based on informal interview in students' native language about their studying/reading habits, attitude towards education, as well as hobbies and interests. The formal part includes a short baseline in math and writing. Students whose native language is Spanish are evaluated with the Spanish Lab. We follow NYS testing regulations and offer translated versions of state tests in the students' home languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ENL and content teachers are trained to meet the needs of ELLs with interrupted formal education. Training includes inter-class visitation and collaboration during common planning periods. These sessions include instructional techniques for SIFE students. Students are also given support outside the classroom including extended day, Saturday academy, and summer school that focus on English language development with native language support. Students in the United States for less than three years are assessed in their English and Native language proficiency. When they first arrive, they are tested with the NYSITELL and Spanish Lab. At the end of that year, they are administered the NYSESLAT. During the year, students are also evaluated with the ELL Periodic Assessment and through teacher created 6  assessments. Teachers use these scores to guide instruction. Once in the classroom, teachers make observations and assessments of daily practice in the areas of speaking, listening, reading and writing. They assess literacy using various ongoing assessment tools. Based on assessment, students receive explicit instruction to develop their speaking and listening and reading and writing proficiency. Students are held to the same ELA standards as non ELLs and teachers scaffold lessons to reach the same goals as English proficient students. Teachers of ELLs have high expectations as well as provide high levels of support. ENL and Content teachers are trained to teach ELLs receiving service 4-6 years using various linguistic and scaffolding strategies. Teachers work together to assess student instructional needs using formal and informal assessments including ongoing observations, Periodic Assessments, and NYSESLAT data. Literacy and language needs by modality are determined. Teachers meet during common planning and grade level meetings to discuss specific instructional needs. Literacy is developed through individual, guided and group instruction. Students are also given native language support such as technology, translation glossaries, and dictionaries. ENL and content teachers work collaboratively to meet the needs of long term ELLs. This includes inter-classroom visitations and collaboration during common planning periods where instructional plans for building academic language and literacy needs are discussed. These sessions guide instruction of Long Term ELLs as teachers deliberate over appropriate scaffolding strategies to target the needs of ELLs. Students are also given support outside the classroom including extended day, Saturday academy, and summer school that focus on English and native language support. The ENL teacher and content teachers examine student data and reviews students’ needs to prepare and implement appropriate academic interventions such as specific guided instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL, content and special education teachers are trained to meet the needs of ELL students with IEPs. Professional development includes inter-classroom visitation, inter-school visitation, professional study groups, and coaching. Those teachers also meet to collaborate during common planning periods. Students are given support outside the classroom including morning and after-school programs, Saturday school, and summer programs that focus on native language and English support. The ENL, general education and special education teachers examine student data and review students’ needs to prepare and implement appropriate academic interventions. Teachers of ELL-SWDs use a variety of strategies and grade level materials that provide access to academic content areas and accelerates English language development. For example, some strategies include graphic organizers, "juicy sentences" activities, read-alouds, and discussion protocols such as back-to-back, face-to-face, and numbered corners. In addition, teachers provide guided instruction in small groups and one-on-one conferences. In addition, we have a wealth of technological resources to foster academic success for our ELL-SWDs. Every classroom has their own SMART Board and students will be given their own iPads and/or laptops for use in school. Interactive technology programs include: BrainPOP (and BrainPop ESL), NewsELA, and MYON. Teachers also have access to headphones to foster listening and speaking. All classrooms are equipped with substantial classroom libraries ranging from pre-primer to high school level reading material, as well as audio books. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curriculum maps are being designed for use across content areas. These maps build in modifications for ELLs and SWDs. These modifications provide differentiation and scaffolding where needed. Teachers provide small group instruction and one on one conferences when necessary. In addition, programming considerations are made with regard to student placement. ELL-SWDs are placed in classes where additional support is provided all day (e.g. ICT or SETSS classes) in addition to the push-in ENL teacher. 7  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Hawtree Creek uses data (i.e. a mathematics and writing baseline assessment, the ELL periodic Assessment, NYSESLAT and teacher made quizzes/tests) to target ELL interventions. Classes are programmed based on this data in order to best support our ELLs. ELL teachers co-plan and co-teach with content teachers. Teachers meet weekly to examine student work and determine action plans for individual students. Students receive small group and guided instruction and use support resources according to proficiency and language needs. Daily classroom instruction is in English, where ELLs are serviced via push-in and self-contained models. ELLs receive native language support such as bilingual libraries, translation glossaries, and bilingual dictionaries. During our Saturday academy, students are able to receive native language support using native language reading books and online resources. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Hawtree Creek will be implementing several new school-wide, computer-based programs this year including ST Math and Achieve 3000. The ST Math program teaches the foundational concepts visually, then connects the ideas to the symbols and language, which will have a significant impact on the ELL students. Achieve 3000 is a technology-based reading comprehension program that focuses on specific needs of students in order to provide reading material at each student’s reading level. ELLs have the opportunity to read the same material as their peers but have it tailored to their own personal reading ability. Direct instruction, repetition, and practice using skills to improve reading comprehension are modeled by the ENL teacher. Strategic lessons are scaffolded to provide support when needed but gradually allow the ELL students to take responsibility for their own learning while practicing specific skills needed to close the achievement gap of learning. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are offered opportunities to attend all school programs. All ELLs are required to attend our Extended Day Program from 2:00pm - 3:00pm. There is a Saturday Academy which provides services to ELLs from 9:00 to 12:00 a.m. Instruction focuses on literacy development, academic language, and content area skills through ENL/ELA strategies and methodologies. Students receive native language support through the use of native language libraries and native language independent reading books. Each student has access to books in their native language. ENL teachers also provide services during lunch when needed. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials include technology, such as iPads, assessment tools, literature, and supplies. All ELLs have daily access to computers and SMART Boards in all content areas. Computer-based literacy programs such as MYON, Achieve 3000, and NewsELA will also be used to enhance student performance. These programs have built in assessments to show growth and needs. Teachers in ELA also use assessment tools such the ELL Periodic to guide instruction. In all content areas, teachers make dictionaries and translation glossaries accessible to support instruction. Social Studies teachers avail of online translation services that translate into many languages. ELA classrooms contain ELL libraries that include leveled, age appropriate books and audio books. Independent reading books are available in the students' home languages. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Hawtree Creek Middle School only offers an ENL program. In our program, native language libraries, dictionaries and glossaries are available as well as technology in native languages to support instruction. Instruction is delivered via a workshop model. During the work period, students are grouped accordingly for differentiated instruction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 8  Services support and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Classroom libraries are age and grade appropriate and leveled by literacy needs. Interest inventories are administered in September and teachers gather materials that correspond with students' interests. Books in classroom libraries are chosen based on the needs of our students. In addition, content curriculum maps are being designed with appropriate modifications for ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newcomers are tested and placed using the NYSITELL within 10 days of registration. These students are identified as Commanding, Expanding, Transitioning, Emerging or Entering. These students are placed according to their levels of English proficiency into an appropriate ENL class. Parents have the option of a bilingual class if available at an alternate site. Each student and parent have a causal meeting with our ENL Coordinator, Ms. Muncan, to highlight special programs at Hawtree Creek Middle School to help direct the families to academic support services such as Extended Day, Saturday academy or summer school. Feeder schools visit Hawtree Creek throughout the year beginning in October. Incoming students are invited to a 6th grade orientation in August. At this orientation, students and parents are introduced to our Parent Coordinator, ENL Coordinator and other faculty members who addresses individual needs (i.e. ELL concerns). A Parent Orientation meeting is also held in early September for parents to come and learn more about Hawtree Creek and to meet about individual concerns. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At the current time, 8th Grade ELLs are offered 5 periods a week of Foreign Language (Spanish) instruction. A Spanish Language and Culture elective is offered 2 periods per week for 6th and 7th grade ELLs. This is a fun, interactive course filled with multi-media language activities, where students learn the basics of language through conversation, reading, videos and skits. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Learning Opportunities are available on a monthly basis through the The Division of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) and the Queens Field Support Center. These professional development opportunities include webinars and in-person meetings where teachers have the opportunity to meet with colleagues, collaborate and share ideas. The professional learning opportunities include reviewing the identification process of ELLs, critical ELL components for compliance, teaching content and academic language as well as understanding ELL data. 9  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All staff (content area, ENL, and special education teachers) will receive the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 of ELL training during the 2017-2019 school years. The ENL coordinator and the members of the Language Acquisition Team will turn-key the strategies acquired at the various professional development sessions they attend throughout the school year. These professional development hours will be accomplished during teacher team meetings and bi-weekly department conferences. The focus of the P.D. sessions will be the integration of language development in content area instruction and the scaffolding of the Common Core Learning Standards aligned instruction for the ELLs. The P.D. agendas, sign-in sheets, and materials of each of these professional development sessions are maintained by the staff and the Principal. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Hawtree Creek Middle School Parent Coordinator, Nicole Napolitano, works closely with the parents of our students. MS 297 strives to create a strong partnership with parents. Parental involvement ensures student success. The school organizes frequent parent meetings and activities to develop relationships with parents. We have received support from parents who actively volunteer to help in various activities such as: School Leadership Team, Parent Association, helping with Open House, and Book Fairs. Parents enjoy being a part of school life and have a voice in decision-making. As a new school, some of the several ways in which we communicate with parents is through correspondence sent home, our HCMS website and monthly newsletters. • Parents of our incoming 6th graders are invited to our school for an orientation. • The Guidance Counselor conducts workshops for parents on topics such as Internet safety, school functions and activities, and community services. • Teachers and guidance counselors organize Activity Nights. • The parents can also contact the teacher via the website. • The HCMS website is updated regularly by the Technology Team. This web-site provides parents with school information. • Translation services are available at all school meetings. • Teachers are provided with the DOE translation phone number to assist them in all parent meetings. • Workshops will be conducted for parents of English Language Learners throughout the school year. Topics consist of: the Common Core Learning Standards, the ELA Exam and the NYSESLAT Exam - For the 2017-2018 school year, parents will also be notified about: - Assignments and projects along with due dates using the REMIND app. - Performance in each class including homework, class work, tests and projects; - Progress reports from teachers throughout the school year; - Handouts and assignments when children are absent; - School announcements, new calendar listings and upcoming events. • How to get the most out of parent-teacher conferences • Identifying resources to support your child’s learning and developmental needs • Understanding the Common Core Learning Standards, standardized tests, and response to intervention • Learning how to help your child be ready for college and careers - Program offers academic, youth development, partnerships and support to parents and family members - Activities and classes will be offered to ELL parents. - Counseling will also be available to any ELL parent in need. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 0  Hawtree Creek Middle School's Parent Coordinator, Stacy Williams, works closely with the parents of our students. MS 297 strives to create a strong partnership with parents. Parental involvement ensures student success. The school organizes frequent parent meetings and activities to develop relationships with parents. We have received support from parents who actively volunteer to help in various activities such as: School Leadership Team, Parent Association, helping with Open House, and Book Fairs. Parents enjoy being a part of school life and have a voice in decision-making. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Maureen Hussey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Hawtree Creek Middle School School DBN: 27Q297 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Maureen Hussey Title Principal Alex Parker Assistant Principal Stacy Williams Parent Coordinator Shauna Muncan ENL/Bilingual Teacher n/a Parent Alyson Parilla ELA Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a n/a Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Despina DeLuca School Counselor Mary Barton Josh Metz Jane Seidemann n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q297 School Name: HawtreeCreek Middle School Superintendent: Jennifer Ambert The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Shauna Muncan ENL Teacher YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registration, all parents complete a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) to determine the child’s home language. In addition, a brief oral interview with the parent and the child is conducted along with the HLIS by a trained pedagogue. The revised HLIS includes a supplementary section that asks parents to indicate their language preference when receiving important information from the school in writing or orally. After reviewing this information, written translation and oral interpretation needs can now be determined at registration for newly admitted students. Student Emergency cards are also reviewed to determine the preferred language of parents. We also review various ATS reports such as the Home Language Aggregation Report and Place of Birth Report to monitor shifts in our demographics. In addition, we conduct informal interviews among the school staff, parents of our ELLs as well as parents who may speak another language to assess the need for translation or 4  interpretation services. We review records of the number of requests for interpretation and past participation of non-English speaking parents at schools events, parent workshops, and conferences. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic French Haitian Creole Hindi English Punjabi Portuguese Spanish 2 2 1 1 352 2 0 23 0.52 0.52 0.26 0.26 91.91 0.52 0 6.01 0 2 1 1 352 3 0 24 0 0.52 0.26 0.26 91.91 0.78 0 6.27 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Policies and Procedures: For example residency questionnaire and Admissions, Re-admissions, Transfer and List Notice for All Students August/September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Download NYCDOE translated copies for distribution before the school year begins and to have available as new students are enrolled. (Avail of the DOE’ contracted vendor “thebigword, Inc” for low incident languages.) 5  Parent notification letters: For example Parent-Teacher Conference Notification Letters Throughout the school year- during November and March for Parent teacher conferences Student report cards Required school surveys/forms, for example Parent Student Ethnic Identification Form and Emergency Contact Card Consent forms, for example, field trips Health Forms November, January, April and June August/September or as newly enrolled students are admitted to the school Throughout the school year August/September or as newly enrolled students are admitted to the school Through out the school year as the recess date approaches. Download NYCDOE translated copies for distribution before the school year begins and to have available as new students are enrolled. (Avail of the DOE’ contracted vendor “thebigword, Inc” for low incident languages.) Utilize the online-translated version of the STARS student report card. Download NYCDOE translated copies for distribution before the school year begins and to have available as new students are enrolled. Download NYCDOE translated copies for distribution as needed. Avail of the DOE’ contracted vendor “thebigword, Inc” for low incident languages.) Download NYCDOE translated copies for distribution before the school year begins and to have available as new students are enrolled. (Avail of the DOE’ contracted vendor “thebigword, Inc” for low incident languages.) 6  Download NYCDOE translated copies for distribution before the school year begins and to have available as new students are enrolled. (Avail of the DOE’ contracted vendor “thebigword, Inc” for low incident languages.) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night September Parent/Teacher Conferences November/March Student-Led Conferences December/May October/November Annual Meeting for Parents of ENL Students. Informal parent communication (Tuesdays-1:50pm-2:35pm) interpretation service(s)? Have an interpreter/over-the-phone translator; bilingual school personnel Have an interpreter/over-the-phone translator; bilingual school personnel Have an interpreter/over-the-phone translator; bilingual school personnel Have an interpreter/Over-the phone translation; bilingual school personnel As requested by parent or teacher Have an interpreter/Over-the phone translation; bilingual school personnel 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency.  Refer to the School Level Adult Preferred Language Report (RAPL) in order to determine which language is needed to communicate orally with our limited English proficient parents. Copies of the report will be available in the main office as well as with the Language Access Coordinator (LAC).  Utilize present staff that speaks the language of the student  Utilize family members of other students who speak the same language.  Utilize the over-the-phone interpretation unit  Utilize our co-located colleagues who speak the language of limited English proficient families in the case of an emergency. 7  Contact the District Office for assistance in the case of an emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The LAC’s main responsibility is to facilitate the provision of language access services to all staff members in the school building. In addition the LAC ensure every member of the school is aware of his/her obligations with respect to providing language access ad assisting LEP parents. The Chancellor's Regulations are reviewed during Staff PD at the beginning of September (prior to the start of the school year) and a copy A-663 will be included in the Faculty Handbook. The Language Access Coordinator will also turnkey the training regarding the resources available to parents, including the over-the-phone interpretation services, on-site interpretation services and the DOE’s contracted vendor, (thebigword,Inc) for written translations. The training will also highlight bilingual school personnel and their availability for interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In the beginning of every school year, the LAC will be provided with a Language Access Kit. This kit includes the following resources to help address language barriers within the school:  Multi Welcome and Achieve NYC posters remind parents that the school can assist them in their language. These posters are displayed visibly at the main entrance of the building  A Language Identification Guide to help school staff identify the language of a limited-English-proficient parent. This guide covers 30 languages and is displayed in the main entrance for visiting parents.  A Translation and Interpretation Unit informational brochure and calendar is available in the main office.  The Parent’s Guide to Language Access brochure is also available. This multilingual brochure include “I Speak” cards for parents to use when requesting language services at our school, directs parents to translated online resources, and asks them to provide online feedback on the language services they receive. These brochures are distributed to our limited-English proficient parents at the beginning of the school year. Within the Parent’s Guide to Language Access, information about parents’ rights to and the availability of language services offered can be found in the Parent’s Bill of Rights. The LAC, along with the Parent Coordinator and the Guidance Counselor, will have a meeting for Limited English Proficient Parents to invite them into the school. Interpretation services will be provided along with the teachers and students who speak the various languages of our families. During this meeting/time, parents will be made aware of the process of receiving information, plus parents will have an opportunity to meet key staff that can be of service to them during the school year. 8  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Hawtree Creek Middle School’s limited English proficient population has continued to grow as we enter the 6th year of the school. As we continue to grow and welcome our Limited-English Proficient (LEP) parents, we will maintain effective open lines of communication and ensure that interpretation services are available when necessary.After receiving information or communicating with a staff member at our school, we invite our parents to complete the NYCDOE Parent Access Language Survey to help improve language services at our school. As well as being available in multiple languages, these surveys will be kept on file and used to make adjustments to the Language Translation Interpretation Plan and services that are provided at our school. 9 
