 29Q313 School Name: BENJAMIN FRANKLIN HIGH SCHOOL FOR FINANCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY Principal: DUDRIGE BRENORD     Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information BENJAMIN FRANKLIN HIGH SCHOOL FOR FINANCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 342900011313 9,10,11, 12 School Number (DBN): 29Q313 207-01 116 TH AVENUE, CAMBRIA HEIGHTS, NY 11411 718 276 0150 EXT 3140 Phone Number: 718 276 4725 Fax: School Contact Person: Email Address: Dudrige Brenord Dbrenord@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dudrige Brenord Andrew Jacklin Allison Dundas KestonKerr TaramatieMunilall CarlosEscobar TasleemaMohamed N/A District Information Geographical District: 29 Superintendent’s Office Address: Juan Mendez Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place; Flushing, NY 11354 jmendez2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-3517 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   QUEENS South-ROCKAWAY BLVD FSC: MARLENE WILKS Executive Director: 8201 Rockaway Blvd, Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dudrige Brenord BrianaSciammarella Allison Dundas KestonKerr TaramatieMunilall TasleemaMohamed Carlos Escobar ClydeMohammed-Bujan Curtis Buckner Junior Barnett Sonia Rodriguez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Member/Teacher Member/ parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Isaiah Taylor KingswinChung Student representative student representative Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Overview: Section 4: CEP Overview Our mission is to provide young men and women with the foundations for success in college and for careers in Information Technology (IT) & Finance. As a Career & Technical Education (CTE) school, we will nurture and support our students while providing rich, industry-approved coursework and recognized certifications in the fields of IT & Finance. Students at BFIT have multiple opportunities to participate in Work Based Learning (WBL) activities that range from in-school speakers to job shadowing to paid internships. The BFIT curriculum will focus on communication 0  skills, critical thinking, and personal and academic responsibility. Students will develop the college readiness skills that will give them an edge in their future careers. A BFIT graduate will be prepared to attend college and graduate level studies in a wide variety of fields. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. BFIT is a new small school that opened in September 2014. CTE – A Career & Technical High School A CTE school - BFIT students will graduate with industry recognized certifications (Adobe Photoshop, IC3) and coursework which prepares them for the workforce and for college. We will be partnering with and using National Academy Foundation (NAF) approved IT & Finance curriculum and our course strands are New York State Department of Education approved. Partnership with Higher Education BFIT’s partnership with Queens College (QC), CUNY, will allow our students access to college credit courses while still in high school and will allow us to collaborate with the QC School of Education on professional development for our teachers. Furthermore, BFIT has two faculty members from Queens College on our Advisory Council who act as thought partners as we strengthen our curriculum, teaching and learning methods, and expand our network. Finally, at least two groups of 45 students will visit the Queens College campus each year during which time the BFIT students participate in various activities led by current college students. In addition to QC, BFIT will continue to participate in the NYCDOE's College Access for All (CA4A) initiative. Industry Partnership and CTE Advisory Council Our industry partner TD Bank will help us develop a strong curriculum that applies to the real world of IT & Finance and provide the potential for internships in the professional world. We will also look to recruit other industry partners to support our school’s mission. The Advisory Council will also play an important role in planning and implementing various Career Days at BFIT. Institute for Student Achievement ISA has a long history of supporting small schools in maintaining an academically rigorous environment where teachers and staff all work collaboratively to support both academic and social-emotional needs. Our partnership will strengthen our ability to meet the needs of all of our students while we continually push ourselves to be stronger educators. Sports, Extra-curricular activities Our school will offer all the benefits of a “traditional high school” in terms of sports, after school tutoring, and clubs. The building with which we share space with 3 other schools has a full-range of PSAL and intramural sports. Sports, clubs, and after school tutoring motivate students to do better and build a strong connection to school. 1  The Future Project BFIT's partnership with The Future Project means that our school community has an embedded leader called a Dream Director. BFIT's Dream Director works with individual students and adults, as well as small and large groups of students, to create action plans based on growth-mindsets where all members of our community work on building the entrepreneurial and social-emotional skills necessary for personal and professional success in the 21st century. Demographic Information According to the Annual Enrollment Snapshots provided by the NYCDOE, as of 6/13/18, BFIT has 397 students in grades 9-12. There are 125 9th graders, 106 10th graders, 77 11th graders, and 89 12th graders. Sixty students (15.1%) receive special education services and 47 (11.8%) students receive mandated services though our English as a New Language teachers. The year-to-date attendance rate is 85.9%. The student body is approximately 66% male, 34% female. The enrollment by ethnicity is as follows: Black or African American: 63%, Hispanic or Latino, 15%, Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander, 15%, White 2%, Multiracial, 5%. The New York State Education Department data indicates that 84% of the student body is economically disadvantaged. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Official DOE statistics indicate that the school serves 11.8% English language learners and 15.1% students with disabilities. Students in these categories need support of specialist in the classroom, along with specific training for the general educators. Students may receive support in the form of having a special educator or ENL specialist co-teach with a general education teacher, receiving instruction in a small group setting, and/or receiving support services from speech language pathologists, physical therapists, counselors, occupational therapists, assistive technology specialists, and audiologists. The individual learning needs of the students who fall under either or both of these categories are shared with the general education teachers on a need t know basis. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strengths, Accomplishments & Challenges: As a new school, we are proud of the academic rigor of our course sequence as well as our individualized interventions that help all students be successful. In grade and subject area teams, all of our pedagogues work together to establish consistently high expectations and analyze student work in order to recognize trends and adjust instruction. ln April 2018, BFIT had its third National Honor Society induction during which more than 45 sophomores and juniors were recognized for their exceptional academic achievement and character. As noted in our 2018 CTE State Review, another strength is the strong support we have from our partners, ISA, TD Bank. The Future Project, and Queens College. These partnerships have led to almost 100% of current BFIT students having at least 2 WBL experiences. As noted in our 2016 Quality Review and our 2017-18 School Survey, our teacher/staff collaboration is another strength for BFIT. All educators participate in structured grade-level and department meetings on a regular basis, including during common planning time. Additionally, all educators work together to improve their planning and instruction via Instructional Rounds. The great challenge is to ensure these positive structures and processes all lead to the continual improvement of instruction at BFIT, in order to maximize student learning and achievement. Per our 2016 Quality Review and 2018 Quality Review, Collaborative Teachers is the element of the Framework for Great 2  Schools which the school made the most progress and Rigorous Instruction is the element of the Framework for Great Schools will be the key focus for this coming school year. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q313 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 397 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 5 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 76.1% % Reduced Lunch 11.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 4.3% 14.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.1 0% 29% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 29 29 20 86.2% 7.8% 15.1% 62.5% 15.1% 5.0% 2 12% 1.8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The feedback from the 2017-18 Principal Performance Observation supports BFIT’s schoolwide goals of a focus on writing across the curricula, ongoing use of data from a variety of sources (including DDC) to evaluate and modify instructional planning, and using Instructional Rounds to strengthen our areas of need, which are as follows: Increased differentiation and scaffolding for all levels of learners, particularly SWDs and ENLs   Ensuring that teacher team inquiry work and feedback leads to appropriate and timely adjustments in instructional planning  Ensuring that data analysis is evident in instructional planning documents According to the 2016-17 Schools Quality Review, Quality Indicator 1.2, Pedagogy was rated as "Developing", with the findings stating that "Across most classes, students were limited with opportunities to engage in their assignments and discussions through multiple entry points." This feedback will be addressed by continuing to partner with ISA to strengthen unit and lesson plans through inquiry cycles with administration, coaches, and peers. The above needs were further validated by a review of the data from Regents exams, scholarship reports, and iReady diagnostics for reading. For the 2016-17 SY, the "Ten Credit Points in 3 Years" was 74.5% for Cohort T, according to the School Quality Guide. This data, along with a team analysis of student writing, confirms that BFIT must maintain its instructional focus on literacy, including close reading of complex text and supporting writing by adapting school-wide expectations, including revisions and peer editing and that this must be done through coherent unit and lesson planning. BFIT will continue to use a portion of summer orientation to assess incoming 9th graders in order to generate data that will be used to adjust the curricula. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019 we will be able to evidence that rigorous instructions is happening in at least 85% of the classrooms. An environment in which high expectation is the norm is created where each student is expected to learn at high levels; where students are appropriately challenged and supported so he or she can learn and demonstrates learning at high levels. This will be evidenced by an increase in Regents scores across the school. A 20% increase for algebra I, 15% for ELA, 15% for Global, 15% for Living Environment, 10% for US history, We will provide students who score 65 and above on the Regents with additional resources to meet the College Readiness Benchmarks. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop clear definition of rigor school wide to enable teachers to understand the meaning of rigor. Including creating a checklist of components of rigorous instructions and lesson plan template with the components of rigorous instructions. All content area teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 School administration, teachers Administration will provide tools (Datacation Data Driven Classroom- DDC and iReady Diagnostic Reading program) and quality professional development to support data collection. Using the data, teachers will adjust curriculum according to student needs, work closely with special education and ESL teachers (see more under Capacity Framework Element 5C- Collaborative Teachers). Through this collaborative process administration and teachers will build trusting relationships through their work on the shared goal of improving student outcomes. All content area teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 School administration Teachers and School leaders will develop comprehensive curriculum aligned to the CCLS and the instructional shift to help students develop the capacity to understand content that is complex or ambiguous, and personally or emotionally challenging. All content area teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, school administration Develop and utilize pre and post assessments that are comprehensive and that benchmark student progress. Create bi-weekly assessment that will be used in each course to monitor student achievement and growth in the curriculum. Assist teachers in planning rigorous instructions and meeting the needs of all learners. Effective use of various writing strategies including: Pre-writing strategies brainstorming, focused free writing, use of pictures, texts and quotes, mapping, webbing etc. Drafting strategies - Identifying and elaborating on the most important ideas generated from the pre-writing activities and using various ways to organize ideas based on purpose; for All content area teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, school administration 7 example, cause-effect, comparison and contrast, problem-solution, pros and cons, chronological arrangement of ideas. Revising strategies - teaching students how to decide what needs to be retained, added, changed or deleted from the draft using strategies such as making an outline, reading text aloud, and getting feedback from peers. Editing strategies focusing on the conventions of writing like form, appearance, syntax, spelling, punctuation and capitalization, word choice and usage. Incorporate writing in all content areas. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. School Counselor and Parent Coordinator will host after school events that focus on understanding transcripts and how to support students' completion of homework throughout the school year. The advisory teachers will reach out to parents whose students are in danger of failing classes and arrange meetings with the administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. State-aligned research-based benchmark assessments, common planning time, content expert in reading, teacher coverages to support the Instructional Rounds process. Funds to purchase Data collection tool and assessment materials. Training for staff that may involve per diem or per session funds for content specific supports. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 78% of of Cohort U students will have accumulated 5 credits, at least 3 in core subjects. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress to Graduation Tracker, Transcript Review, STARS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Throughout the 2017 - 18 school year, our staff, PTA, and SLT met to keep parents informed and build a supportive environment. We are mindful that we are a growing school that had been adding a class every year until now. This means that we must instill the culture with a new team of teachers, a new class of ninth grade students, and reassure a new set of parents. During our annual recruitment period, we conducted two orientation sessions with parents of incoming 9 th grade students and plan to meet again with these parents during our summer bridge program in August 2018. During those sessions, we continue to see very important qualitative data. We have done our best throughout the year to reassure parents and did our best to emphasize our own strengths as a new school. We reassured parents that our team had a good track record for safety, that we would be developing clear and consistent policies on behavior and that we are a uniform/dress-code school. We were grateful that many parents supported the school and demonstrated their trust. This trust was evidenced in our 2017-18 School Survey report when over 90% of all parent respondents either agreed or strongly agreed with the statements regarding trust. However, on the same Survey, student answers indicated that BFIT teachers are not providing the support the students need. For example, 41% of students responded "a few" or "none" to the question "My teachers help me catch up if I'm behind." This is a 7% improvement from the 16-17 school year but remains a priority. Our student leaders also work with Advisories and plan Town Halls that focus on BFIT's core values. The Dream Team is producing Town Halls where awards will be given for students who embody BFIT's core values. For the 2018-19 SY our Priority Need is to use data to continue to develop and modify policies on behavior in conjunction with parents to ensure a predictable, supportive, and safe environment for students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019 we will maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. This will lead to improved school culture as evidenced by 25% where possible of the school quality indicators, students’ surveys, parents’ survey, and teachers’ surveys. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create a safe environment and an inclusive culture that support progress toward the school’s goals. The school meaningfully involves student and teacher voices in decision-making to initiate, guide, and lead school improvement efforts. All students and staff Sept 2018-June 2019 School administration   Set realistic expectations for staff and students Support teacher growth with timely feedback focusing on teacher growth with constructive criticism.  Open communications with an open door policy where teachers and students can voice their concerns and monthly newsletter will be used to communicate with teachers, parents and students. Instruct staff in technical aspects of the job  Train staff in desired school culture   Adhere closely to values of the culture  Reinforce rites and rituals of culture Facilitate parental outreach by providing each classroom with a telephone for outgoing calls. Each teacher will be given a four-digit code for outgoing long distance calls. We will provide professional development for all teachers on how to better support students’ social-emotional well-being. This will include professional development that the advisory teachers from last year will turn-key to their peers (as well as Health Smart and reducing the Risk programs from the Office of School Wellness and in collaboration within teacher teams. Parent, Students Sept 2018-June 2019 School administration All students Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration and school counselors We will build positive trusting relationships with parents, students and the community through the further development of school traditions such as our after-school program, community service programs, Thanksgiving Banquet, Career night, Curriculum Night, etc.) Parents, students and entire school community Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, school counselor, parent coordinator, teachers and parents 1  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Advisory and college prep teachers will maintain an open line of communication with parents via PupilPath, phone calls, and 4 scheduled parent nights throughout the school year. The guidance counselor, dean, and parent coordinator will schedule parent meetings at least twice during each semester, that include administration and teachers for students who are at-risk of not earning all of their credits. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for professional development, per session to fund after-school and additional planning time for collaborative work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will have logged at least 7 teacher conferences with action steps as measured by Skedula logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula anecdotal logged as "teacher conferences" are used to monitor progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The majority of BFIT's 18-19 SY team members are hired, attended our planning retreat, some department chairs will attend an ISA overnight planning conference, and some team members will attend the National Academy Foundation Conference in Washington, DC. During this time we will assess each team member’s ability to collaborate and participate in professional development in a culture of respect and continuous improvement. One strength administration has found is that all team members have been enthusiastic and showed a willingness to collaborate. In the November 2016 Quality Review, BFIT teacher teams were indicated to be an area of celebration. Finally, 2017-18 School Survey indicates that over 95% of BFIT teachers These teacher teams engage in structured professional collaborations using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning. We now have the challenge of expanding that strength to our new team members. Even amongst experienced teachers, their experience in positive, collaborative environments varied, therefore, our Priority Need is to provide time for teachers to collaborate across grade teams and departments, as well as structure through electronic resources and meeting protocols. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will work collaboratively to use the inquiry method to create and/or revise unit plans and lesson plans, with changes based on qualitative and quantitative data. The inquiry cycle and the revisions can be measured by team meeting minutes, which will include action items. We will also examine updated lesson/unit plans. Minutes will be kept in a school Google Drive. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration will provide professional development and support through ISA partners and other DOE sources to introduce Understanding by Design, Writing Across Curricular areas. Teachers and administrators will also leverage our partnerships with College Access for All, Algebra for All, and AP for All. New teachers will be provided with in-school mentors, who will work collaboratively to improve teaching practice through inter-visitation and debrief sessions. Grade level teams will participate in learning walks, Instructional Rounds, and inter-visitation so that they can learn from their peers and build trusting, respectful relationships with one another in a culture of continuous improvement. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and BFIT staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, ISA coach, Teacher Team Leaders. New teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration and in-school mentors All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration and Instructional Rounds team captains Administration will provide all teachers with access to a shared Google drive. Teachers and BFIT Staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Grade level teams will work collaboratively, using data such as that from IO assessment and regents item analysis, to engage in goal setting for unit planning and curriculum mapping for all grades. All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Technology Specialist Administration, teacher leaders and ISA coach Special education and ENL teachers will work with all departments and grade levels to support and monitor the accommodations and modifications provided to SWDs and ENLs, as well as provide PLOs that include hands-on modifications of assignments/units of study. General education teachers, SWDs, ENLs Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, teaching staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During PTA sponsored evenings (monthly), Parent Teacher Conferences (2), parents will be informed of the processes that teachers teams use to analyze data, groups students, and adapt the curriculum. The Parent Coordinator and Guidance are responsible for these events. 4  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common planning time, coverage for instructional rounds, PROSE 1/2 days of PD, teacher per session and per diem, supervisor per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teachers will work collaboratively to use the inquiry method to create and/or revise unit plans and lesson plans, with changes based on qualitative and quantitative data. The inquiry cycle and the revisions can be measured by team meeting minutes, which will include action items. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Minutes from teacher team meetings that will be uploaded in the drive. Revised lesson/unit plans. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School leaders must be prepared to face new challenges and provide social-emotional, instructional, and operational support to all staff. Per the 2017-18 Principal Performance Observation (PPO) Indicator 1.3 "Make strategic organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products" was an area of celebration because hiring practices, teacher assignments, and student program groupings and interventions, including those for ELLs and SWDs, continue to effectively support access to learning opportunities that lead to college and career readiness. Both the 2017-18 PPO and 2016-17 Quality Review Report highlighted Indicator 1.2 "Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products" as an are a of growth. It was noted in the above mentioned PPO and QR that teachers are moving towards more student-centered instruction and non-humanities teachers are incorporating more literacy skills into their curricula. In order to continue this trend of student-centered classrooms and literacy across all curricula, our Priority Need is to provide teachers with the supports necessary to design, implement, reflect upon, and revise their lesson and unit plans, including Professional Learning Opportunities and feedback from formal and informal observation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, 100% of BFIT teachers will have been given actionable feedback and logistical support to create student-centered lessons as measured by "Next Steps" entered into Advance by BFIT administration. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Utilize the PLOs offered by the BFCS, Central, and other programs in which BFIT is involved to expand the capacity of BFIT teachers to create student-centered lessons. BFIT teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Department chairs Collaborate in person and remotely with the ISA coach to develop actionable, achievable next steps, individualized for each teacher. All educators Sept 2018-June 2019 School leaders, ISA Coaches Provide targeted feedback for modification for students with SWDs and ENLs which will include castle learning, Apex, and other adaptable sources. SWDs and ELLs Sept 2018-June 2019 Share exemplar lesson plans, student work, and rubrics across curricula for staff to experience via Gallery Walks, etc. All staff Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, Special education, ENL teachers, after school tutors ELA and Social Studies deparment, ISA coaches, administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During Parent/Teacher Conferences that are arranged by the Parent Coordinator an Administration, parents will be given information on home preparation for Regents and how to communicate with teachers via IO. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common planning time, per session funding for additional PROSE planning work, shift in scheduling for instructional rounds/intervisitation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X Title III, Immigrant 7  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of BFIT teachers will have been given actionable feedback and logistical support to create student-centered lessons as measured by "Next Steps" entered into Advance by BFIT administration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We hold regular PTA, and SLT meetings. We conducted two orientation sessions with parents of incoming students, and will meet again during our summer bridge program. During those sessions, we found that parents wanted to have better communication with their child’s school and needed to be kept informed of student progress including attendance. We reassured parents that we would keep them fully informed of student progress and that we would work to address all parent concerns. The preliminary data from the 2017-18 School Survey results shows that the response rate for BFIT parents was 27%, a 10% increase for 2016-17. We worked throughout the year to build a positive relationship with parents by keeping them informed through our regular meetings, email, and PupilPath. Our priority need is that all parents are aware of and understand their students’ academic and behavioral standing. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, BFIT will have had contact with at least 90% parents and continue to develop strong school processes and systems that support positive communication with our parent community as evidenced by paper and digital logs. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration, Sept 2018-June 2019 School administration Teachers and staff Sept 2018-June 2019 School leader, Parent Coordinator, and Computer Tech Specialist School leader and teacher teams, parent coordinator School leader, Parent Coordinator, advisory teachers, attendance teacher, and counselors Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Provide Parent Coordinator with monthly professional development opportunities on engaging parents, particularly through the PTA. We will once again purchase Datacation, IO/Pupil Path software and provide professional development for staff to use the program, which includes a web-based electronic grade book with parent log-in component, email, phone calls, letters, phone master messages. In addition to the parent log-in component, we will continue to create a parent calendar and provide parents with hard copies of students’ progress reports at two-week intervals. Students and parents Sept 2018-June 2019 The school counselor, parent coordinator, and advisory teachers will maintain regular communication with any students with a pattern of absence or lateness and work with the attendance committee to develop interventions and incentives for positive attendance. Parents and students with patterns of absence or lateness Sept 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Future Project (a CBO partner) and our Dream Director will also outreach to parents and share this information with BFIT's Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds for the purchase of IO/Pupil Path program and professional development. Team planning time for school events. Per Session for evening Parent events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, BFIT will have documented communication with 85% of all parents, as measured by Skedula logs, iLogs, and paper logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent sign-in, Parent Coordinator contact records, Skedula data, iLog Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Examination of Data such as 8th grade NYS exams, baseline assessments from summer bridge, course pass rates for 9 th-12th graders. Ongoing assessment throughout the year. Examination of Data such as 8th grade NYS exams, baseline assessments from summer bridge, course pass rates for 9th 10th 11th 12th graders. Ongoing assessment throughout the year. Examination of Data such as 8th grade NYS exams, baseline assessments from summer bridge, course pass rates for 9th-12th graders.. Ongoing assessment throughout the year. Examination of Data such as 8th grade NYS exams, baseline assessments from summer bridge, course pass rates for 9th-12th graders. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Double periods of ELA in 9 th; Strategic literacy club (iReady) Double periods of Math in 9th grade- and tutoring Tutoring and ESL support services for Science. Tutoring and ESL support services in Social Studies Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ELA/ESL support services- during the school day and after-school, during after-school tutoring. ESL support services after school or during Team taught classes. Double periods of Math in 9thgrade- during the school day, and Tutoring after-school and/or during lunch. ESL support services after school or during Team taught classes. Tutoring after-school and/or during lunch. ESL support services after school or during Team taught classes. ESL support services after school or during Team taught classes. Tutoring after-school and/or during lunch. ESL support services- during the school day and after-school When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and after school During the school day and after school During the school day and after school During the school day and after school 2 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Ongoing assessment throughout the year. Examination of data: close examination of middle school records for 9 th grade and counseling records for 10 th, 11th, 12thgrade. Record of mandated counseling on IEP or anecdotal data from parents, summer bridge or advisory teachers. Counseling- during the school day for mandated counseling students as well as other students at-risk Students will receive small-group or one to one counseling during advisory and health classes and in the counselor’s office as scheduled. During the school day 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Counseling from guidance counselor, parent outreach from guidance counselor and parent coordinator, referral to social worker at Jamaica Hospital clinic, school uniforms, school supplies, personal care items, metro cards Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: As always, our hiring committee (school leaders and teachers) will continue to fill vacancies by seeking highly qualified teachers and putting applicants through a rigorous interview and demo lesson process. We look for candidates through TeachNYC, recruitment fairs and through references from other effective teachers. Teachers are informed about our school model and must be willing to support the work that we do to join the team. Retention: Once teachers are on board, we hope that most stay because of the collegial and supportive, sharing environment. Teachers work collaboratively together and share ideas during our annual retreat, professional learning activities, common planning time and at whole staff meetings. Teachers who are satisfied with their work and having an impact on student success are more likely to stay with a school. Teaching Assignments: As always teachers are given assignments based on their licensing, their talents and their stated preferences. Teachers complete preference sheets every year and a schedule is developed based on the needs of the school and the students. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development: Professional development is chosen in several ways. When there is a school-wide or departmental initiative, teachers as a group may need training (IO, APEX, iLearn). Frequent professional development is made available through our Borough Field Support Center and Superintendent's Office, such as Special Education reform, Arts in education, support for Math teachers etc.. Teachers work collaboratively and participated in PD and common planning. Teachers also seek their own professional development opportunities on topics they are particularly interested in or related to their content area. Part 3: TA Schools Only 6  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As a PROSE school and a school which received a “Well-Developed” on our School Quality Review, we will continue to work to include teachers in all decision making in regards to assessments. Teachers will form the MOSL committee and will lead the grade level teams that make these decisions. Teachers help develop the Professional Learning plan for the school and frequently deliver the training for peers (Supports for ENLS, SWDs, IO, Castle Learning, School Wide Writing Across Content Areas, etc.) 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 7  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 102,503. N/A N/A N/A N/A references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A N/A X N/A Column B Section Reference(s) 5 A-D N/A N/A 5 A-D N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 8  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Benjamin Franklin High School for Finance & Information Technology ,in compliance with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Benjamin Franklin High School for Finance & Information Technology will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 0  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 1  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under ESSA ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Benjamin Franklin High School for Finance & Information Technology , in compliance with ESSA, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic 2  achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 3  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 4  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● support the school’s dress code policy by making sure that my son/daughter leaves home in appropriate attire; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 5  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In reviewing our most recent NYSESLAT data, we noticed that the majority of our students tested at the Transitioning and Expanding levels. Therefore, our Title III program will be consist of two pieces. Students in the 11th-12th grades will have opportunities for enrichment and academic tutoring to improve their academic language. This program will meet from 8:30-9:15 Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays and is prior to classes for students in 11th and 12th grades. Freshmen and sophomores begin school earlier and, therefore they will not be included in this particular part of the program. Additionally, all students (grades 9-12) will have the opportunity to take part in an after school program on Wednesdays from 3:15-5:00. During both of these times, students will have access to small group tutoring for content area assignments, "language lab" activities to meet their specific needs, as well as cultural transition activities to aid in adjustment to New York and prepare for the college-going experience in the United States. Students who need to earn additional credits will also be able to use the language lab to complete iLearn classes so as to catch up and be able to graduate on time. Students will have access to Chromebooks and headphones for use during the Title III program. Information about resources will be published to a google classroom which all Title III eligible students will be invited to join. Links on Google classroom will include, but not be limited to, Duolinguo, iReady, Grammar Up! and ENL. culips.com This program will be conducted in English, with the use of online dictionaries and translation programs for students as needed. It will be run by Mr. Braunshweiger, ENL teacher. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Mr. Braunshweiger will attend the fall ELL Conference in October (9am-4pm). During the school year, all members of the ENL department will attend professional development offerings from DELLSS as they become available (usually 9am-3pm). Ms. Amores is a founding member of Queens South Language Access Coordinator Board, which meets 5 times during the school year (9am-12pm). All members of the ENL department will provide the agendas to the payroll secretary for the record keeping. The professional development will help the teachers to better serve the ELL population by addressing challenges identified by all stakeholders. Throughout the school year, the ENL department will turnkey information to the general education teachers during school-wide professional development. ELL specific topics will be addressed each semester based upon staff 8  Part C: Professional Development needs. This will occur on a Friday from 12:30pm-2:00pm. ELL teachers also share strategies during routine co-planning for classroom instruction. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We will hold ELL Parent nights to discuss graduation requirements and how to help their students. Parents will be notified of the ELL Parent night via translated letters (translated by staff, DOE Translation and Interpretation, and TheBig Word) based upon parent preferred language. During the ELL Parent Night, we will share class requirements, Regents exams, PSAT/SAT exams, as well as provide resources for parents to assist their children in learning English. Translated materials and interpretation will be provided via bilingual staff as well as outside interpreters. ELL Parent nights are held by our school counselor, Charma White, the ELL Coordinator, Margaret Amores, and assistant principal Cathleen Cuffie-Jack. Follow up sessions will be scheduled based upon parent requests. ELL Parent nights are held once each semester, in November or December and again in April or May. Each ELL Parent night lasts 1.5 hours. In speaking with our ELL parents, and surveying them during parent meetings, parents indicated that they were most concerned with understanding the requirements for graduation and how to help their children learn English faster. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. N/A Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name Benjamin Franklin HS for Finance and I.T Borough Queens School Number 313 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carla Theodorou Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Margaret Amores Teacher/Subject Area Paula Gallego/ELA Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Assistant Principal Susan Keyock Coach School Counselor Charma White Parent Easter Gaddy Parent Coordinator Tarrick Johnson Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 462 1 Total number of ELLs 56 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.12%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Freshmen complete baseline math, reading and writing assessments during our Summer Bridge Program. All Freshmen have two English classes. Using data from the NYSESLAT, we place ELLs into the appropriate stand-alone and co-taught sections of ELA/ENL as well as content area classes. Content areas have several formative assessments throughout the year to determine the needs and challenges of the ENL students. We also use iReady to assess reading level and specific skills that need to be reinforced. We also provide an AIS class using iReady for students who need further assistance in reading. In addition, all of our classes include teacher created assessments (pre-assessments, interim assessments and post-assessments) to target acquisition of specific skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our school calendar has time allocated throughout the year for formative assessments. These are reviewed on the department and grade team levels and data are shared school wide using Google Drive. 2  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by examining their progress on in-class assessments and quarterly exams. Last year we met AYP for our ELLs, based on AMAO II. AMAO I data was not available because we do not yet have a graduating class. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Data regarding summative assessments are reviewed at both the departmental and grade team levels and are shared school-wide on our Google Drive. This allows us to make corrections and interventions during the school year. During our staff annual retreat, we are able to use the data to make adjustments to our curriculum maps and unit plans to address challenges that our students have. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the data from last year, we noticed that based on the work students were doing in the classroom, the Expanding students were able to improve their skills and often test out of ENL. Our Newcomers made significant progress, particularly in receptive skills but struggled more in expressive skills. Overall, the NYSESLAT indicated that ELLs of all levels are making progress learning the language but need reinforcement with writing skills. NYSITELL data indicates that students first arriving at our school do not have much if any background in English. Currently, we do not have any students at the Entering Level; they have all progressed to Emerging or beyond. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Several times during the school year the ENL teachers present data to the staff at large to share testing data from the ELLs. In addition, testing data, as well as anecdotal notes, are updated regularly on our school's Google Drive. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Currently we do not have any Entering students. Emerging level students are programmed for a daily stand-alone class to continue working on their foundational skills. In the likely event that a new student arrives at either the Entering or Emerging level, they would join this class. Transitioning students are programmed for a stand-alone class 3 days a week. This class is divided by grade levels to allow students to focus on challenges in their particular classes. ELLs travel in small groups, based upon their skills in Math as well as the credits they require. The ENL teachers provide integrated services to students primarily in their ELA classes but also in other content areas in accordance with CR Part 154.2. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. 3  N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering and Emerging students are programmed for Free-standing ENL each day. . In addition, they receive integrated ENL services during their ELA class. They also have integrated ENL services in additional content areas as needed. This results in a total of 540 minutes per week for Entering students and 360 minutes per week for Emerging students. Transitioning students are programmed for Free-standing ENL three days each week in addition to ENL within the ELA classroom and ENL within content area classes. Because they travel with students who are Entering and/or Emerging, Transitioning students receive more than the required 180 minutes of service each week. Expanding students receive Integrated ENL within their ELA class as well as within their content area classes. Because they travel with students who are at different proficency levels, they receive more than the required 180 minutes of service each week. Commanding students are programmed for 90 minutes of Integrated ENL within the ELA class each week. Students who are in self-contained Special Education classes are also programmed for free-standing ENL (if required). An ENL teacher pushes into their self-contained ELA Special Education class. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All classes are taught in English. Teachers in content areas use some translated materials or leveled reading materials to help students access the content. The students have access to translators and dictionaries. Teachers use images to create a context for the lessons. Sentence starters and writing prompts are used throughout the content areas. During classes, the ENL teacher works with small groups to help them access the texts and tasks via scaffolding activities that vary based upon the text and task. Building the language skills necessary for success is one of the primary goals of the Common Core. By breaking down texts, studying how language functions, reading grade level texts, and writing using textual evidence, students are working toward meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As we do not have a bilingual or dual language program here, we do not monitor progress in the home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: Currently, we use leveled texts to help students access grade level material while building their skills. We also have iReady, which helps students learn to read and understand phonics as well as math skills. Students are provided with translators, subject specific glossaries, and extended time for activities as well as modified tasks. b. Newcomer: Our Newcomer students attend classes with other ELLs as well as gen. ed. students. We try to make language buddies where possible. Students use images and modified texts, including texts in L1 to access the content material. Students are provided with translators, subject specific glossaries, and extended time for activities as well as modified tasks. They can respond to their Regents in their home language and have additional time. c. Developing: Developing students use scaffolded assignments, leveled texts, sentence starters and writing prompts. Directions are given in a variety of ways and graphic organizers are provided. They are` also provided additional time and modified assignments. They can respond to their Regents in their home language and have additional time. d. Long-Term ELLs: Our long-term ELLs attend classes with our other ELLs as well as gen. ed. students. Because of their advanced language skills, they are grouped with Newcomers and Native English speakers. This build confidence as they assist other students who are just beginning to learn English, and provides them with Native fluency and vocabulary so they can 4  continue to build their skills. They are provided with translation dictionaries, subject specific glossaries and extended time for activities as well as modified tasks. They can respond to their Regents in their home language and have additional time. e. Former ELLs: Former ELLs are provided with translation dictionaries and subject specific glossaries. They can respond to their Regents in their home language and have additional time. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are placed in classes with both a SPED and content area teacher. They use visuals, graphic organizers, tiered texts, pair-shares, and bilingual material to allow for multiple entry levels. Students are provided with electronic translators, dictionaries, subject specific glossaries, additional time, as well as modified tasks and texts. Modified materials are teacher created. ELL-SWDs are placed in content classes with other SWDs and other ELLs so they have access to the Special Education teacher, ENL teacher, and all related service providers as determined by the IEP. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs with Special Needs are serviced by both the ENL and SPED teachers. Based on the requirements of the IEP and the annual IEP meetings, student needs are revisited. They receive co-teaching with the SPED teacher and content area teachers based upon the needs outlined in their IEPs. Depending on the requirements of their NYSESLAT scores, they may be programmed for ENL. Regardless, all ELL-SWDs receive push-in ENL services in the content areas to support their learning. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Currently, newcomer ELLs have class time dedicated to developing the content area vocabulary that will allow them to succeed in the content areas. In addition, the ESL teacher provides push-in support for ELLs and FELLs in accordance with the CR 154. Students can attend after school tutoring. Furthermore, we are using I-Ready to assess the skill levels of all of our students in reading and math. These assessments will allow teachers to provide targeted assignments for each student. As this program is just being launched, we do not yet have any data about its effectiveness. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based upon the requirements of CR-154, we will offer both Free-Standing ENL as well as Integrated ENL services. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have never had a bilingual program and do not have the numbers necessary to open one. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are encouraged to participate in all after school programs. PSAL teams and clubs are available after school and if necessary, translation/interpretation services can be used to explain the requirements of these activities to both students are parents. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We used adapted and translated texts, scaffolded activities and graphic organizers. Students have access to dictionaries, thesauruses, visual dictionaries, and leveled readers. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The ENL teacher is able to help students whose L1 is Spanish. Translation services and dictionaries as well as some texts in L1 are used with other students. Students also write in personal journals in their L1. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 5  Required services support and resources correspond to ELL’s ages and grade level. Everything is tailored to the challenges facing incoming Freshmen as they transition from middle school to high school or Sophomores as they continue to accumulate credits and take Regents. Each semester the ENL teacher reviews the needs of the ELLs regarding their programs and services. ELL-SWD's services are also reviewed by the SPED Coordinator. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We work with another school in the building to build relationships between students. Periodically we organize activities with students from both schools. We also work together to ensure that NYSESLAT testing and grading is done in accordance with regulations. Our different schedules do not allow students to take classes with other schools but they do participate in after school activities together, resulting in friendships and support throughout the building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Incoming students are offered the opportunity to attend our Summer Bridge program. All freshmen are placed in an advisory, which allows them the opportunity to connect with a group of students and a staff member. Newly enrolled ELL's have an advisory, which is a social-emotional support as well as to help students stay on track academically. Teachers work to provide the opportunities for students to be "language buddies", providing new students a point person to ask questions of in addition to their advisor. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All students, including ELL's, are provided the opportunity to take Spanish as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for ELL personnel is based upon the needs of the students. DELLSS routinely offers training as do other groups associated with the DOE. When an area of challenge becomes apparent, the ENL teacher looks for opportunities to grow either through formal PD, online webinars, or through reading research and case studies. Our PD calendar has not be finalized this year but will be updated as opportunities arise. Professional development is based upon what is offered by DELLS and other organizations. We partner with ISA, which has an ENL specialist. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 6  All students, including ELLs are invited to New Student Orientation during the summer, as well as Summer Bridge. All freshmen are assigned an adviser to help them transition to high school. The guidance counselor provides individual and small group counseling on an as needed basis. Because we do not have seniors yet, we have not begun any supports to transition from high school to high school. The ENL teacher routinely goes to professional development during the school year. Upon return, she uses the teachers' professional development time to turnkey these strategies to other teachers. For each professional development she attends, she has an agenda and usually other materials. These are used when providing turnkey PD to other staff members and are maintained with the agendas and attendance for each meeting. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher has time dedicated to planning and meeting with ENL parents. Interpretation and translation services are provided as required using either bilingual staff or The Big Word. These meetings are scheduled throughout the year based upon needs of the parents. During these meetings, the ENL teacher shares our program's model, the services that their child is receiving, data regarding their language acquisition and progress toward graduation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are invited to attend PTA meetings and events. Translation/Interpretation services were offered to parents at all meetings. We have a Parent Coordinator on our staff and will plan more specialized activities/workshops for ELL parents. Possibilities, depending on parent interest, include culture night, understanding high school credit, exams and graduation. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carla Theodorou, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Benjamin Franklin H.S. for Fin School DBN: 29Q313 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Carla Theodorou Title Principal Susan Keyock Assistant Principal Tarrick Johnson Parent Coordinator Margaret Amores ENL/Bilingual Teacher Esther Gaddy Parent Paula Gallego/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Charma White School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 29Q313 School Name: Benjamin Franklin HS for Finance Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Margaret Amores Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Each year we ask parents to complete emergency cards, which request the parents' preferred written and spoken language. When students are enrolled, either as freshmen or new admits, we work directly with parents to determine their preferences. We use the RAPL report in ATS to identify parents' preferred language. The ENL teacher updates the parents' preferred language annually. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2 24 2 5 14 1 0 538 1 1 5 1 1 87 8 na na na 0.29 3.48 0.29 0.72 2.03 0.14 0 2 25 1 5 21 1 1 0.29 3.62 0.14 0.72 3.04 0.14 0.14 77.97 531 76.96 0.14 0.14 0.72 0.14 0.14 12.61 1.16 na na na 1 1 5 1 1 88 8 na na na 0.14 0.14 0.72 0.14 0.14 12.75 1.16 na na na Arabic Bengali (Bangla) Chinese (Any) French Haitian Creole Hindi Mandarin English Pashto Pilipino (Tagolog) Punjabi (Panjabi) Portuguese Russian Spanish Urdu na na na 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. none Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 1  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Pupilpath account information-start of the school year/as need September Parent-Teacher Conferences October, March PA and SLT meetings monthly notification After school programs and testing dates As needed Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Pre-translated into Spanish; We will use the Translation and Interpretation unit to translate to their languages and our Translation funds for additional languages as needed Prior to conferences notification is sent out via PupilPath, which are translated by their program or via The Big Word. Notifications are sent out via Pupil Path, which translates based on parent preference or via The Big Word. Notifications are sent out via Pupil Path, which translates based on parent preference 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Curriculum night and Parent-Teacher conferences October, March PA and SLT meetings monthly Orientation/Summer Bridge August/September parent meetings, including ELL parent meetings, IEP meetings, disciplinary and counseling meetings As needed provide interpretation service(s)? We use a combination of staff and Language Line to ensure interpretation services for all parents We use a combination of staff and Language Line to ensure interpretation services for all parents We use a combination of staff and Language Line to ensure interpretation services for all parents We use a combination of staff and Language Line to ensure interpretation services for all parents 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use a combination of staff and Language Line to ensure interpretation services for all parents. Afterwards, we would use our Translation funds translate any relevant information to parents in a timely manner. 2  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September, prior to school beginning, all staff are made aware of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. The Language Access Coordinator provides resources for ensuring that all staff know how to use Language Line. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Language ID Guide is currently at Parent Coordinator's office. The Welcome Poster is located at the entrance to our school. The Parents' Bill of Rights is distributed when students are admitted either as freshmen or as new admits as is the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator regularly communicate with parents about their needs and wishes for their children. They will be surveyed annually. 3 
