 27Q323 School Name: SCHOLARS' ACADEMY Principal: BRIAN O'CONNELL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Scholars’ Academy 342700010323 6-12 School Number (DBN): 27Q323 320 B104 Street Rockaway Park, NY 11694 718-474-6918 Phone Number: 718-945-8958 Fax: Brian O’Connell boconne@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Brian O’Connell Sue Deruvo Irene Dougherty and Mark LaRotunda Michelle Earle NA Stephan Joseph Sean Hilgendorf None District Information Mary Barton Superintendent: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11416 mbarton@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-642-5770 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Queens FSC: Marlene Wilks Executive Director: 82-01 Rockaway Boulevard, Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-348-2959 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Brian O’Connell Kristin Camarinos Irene Dougherty NA NA NA Sean Hilgendorf NA Suzanne Degrechie Patrick Brady Hattie King *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Florence Belfiore Michelle Earle Jessica Henck ToniMarieViera Member/ Parent Member/ Staff/Teacher Member/ Staff/Teacher Member/ Staff/Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement To prepare for colleges and careers of the 21st Century Vision Statement   To engage the entire Scholars’ Academy Community in cultivating and celebrating well rounded scholars and citizens equipped with the knowledge, skills, and attitudes to pursue success and happiness in the 21st Century Note: To Accomplish this mission, Scholars' Academy embodies the research-tested attributes of the Framework for Great Schools. Through effective school leadership, the Scholars' Academy teachers collaborate to design and engage students in rigorous instructional tasks and a structured student advisory program that results in a supportive environment built upon trust and strong family-community ties. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Scholars' Academy, located on the Rockaway Peninsula, was created by a District 27 Community School Board Resolution on March 1, 2004 to create an academically accelerated and demographically integrated haven of learning for gifted children. The Scholars’ Academy was charged with the mission of attracting high performing students from opting for other competitive entry, or highly sought after, public, charter, or private schools. To accomplish this goal, Scholars’ Academy, a 6-12th grade school, replaced middle school (27Q180). The Scholars' Academy was launched via a grassroots local community effort of parents, elected officials, and community school board members to be a competitive entry school with a school-based admissions process. Parents and aspiring students may access the online application in November of the preceding year of intended enrollment. Students are evaluated and ranked competitively using multiple measures of assessment. Students receive seat offers, denials of seat offers, or waiting list placement in spring of the preceding enrollment year. At Scholars' Academy, students benefit academically, as well as socially and emotionally. During instruction, all scholars are actively engaged in teams called triads on learning tasks through a “Scale-Up” research-based model of cooperative learning used by many top universities such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). From grade 6 through grade 12, students at the Scholars’ Academy leverage technology and cooperatively engage in learning tasks and performance based assessments which enhance their academic performance to better prepare for college and careers of the 21st Century. Notably, through the use of this instructional model, coupled with ample use of education technology resources, Scholars' Academy students, especially students with special needs, performed high compared to their peers. NYS ELA SWD Grade 6 - 50% of the students are levels 3 or 4. This is 36% higher than the state average (14% level 3s &4s). Grade 7 - 60% of the students are levels 3 or 4. This is 50% higher than the state average (10% level 3s & 4s). Grade 8 - 67% of the students are levels 3 or 4. This is 53% higher than the state average (14% level 3s & 4s). NYS Math SWD Grade 6 - 35% of the students are levels 3 or 4. This is 23% higher than the state average (12% level 3s &4s). Grade 7 - 63% of the students are levels 3 or 4. This is 53% higher than the state average (10% level 3s & 4s). HS Algebra Regents Grade 8 Students with Special Needs Posted a 77% pass rate. Summary of Most Recently Available Data - NYS ELA and Math Exam Level 3 & 4 Performance 0  Middle School Comparison to NYC Averages NYS ELA Grade 6 - 93% of the students are levels 3 or 4. This is 44% higher than the state average (49% level 3s &4s). Grade 7 - 93% of the students are levels 3 or 4. This is 53% higher than the state average (40% level 3s & 4s). Grade 8 - 94% of the students are levels 3 or 4. This is 46% higher than the state average. (48% level 3s & 4s). NYS Math Grade 6 - 91% of the students are levels 3 or 4. This is 47% higher than the state average (44% level 3s &4s). Grade 7 - 93% of the students are levels 3 or 4. This is 52% higher than the state average (41% level 3s & 4s). HS Algebra Regents Grade 8 students Posted a 98% pass rate. In addition to HS Algebra, all middle school students at Scholars' Academy also complete the Living Environment Course and Regents, as well as the Spanish Proficiency Year 1 Course and Exam by the end of 8th grade. In 2018, 100% of 8th graders passed the Living Environment Regents with an average score of 88% and 76% of students scoring above an 85. Students with needs achieved a 100% pass rate with a mean scale score of 86%. In 2018, 95% of 8th graders passed the Spanish Proficiency exam with an average score of 86% and 86% of students scoring above an 85. Students will needs attained a 67% pass rate with a mean scale score of 71%. High School students also engage in an ambitious course of study with great results with regard to HS Diploma Status. HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA STATUS DATA 2011-2018 Class of 2018 Class of 2017 Class of 2016 Class of 2015 Class of 2014 Class of 2013 Class of 2012 Class of 2011 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 98.9% 100% 96% 100% 97.3% 96.6% 98% 96.9% 88.6% 99% 33.5% 46.2% 44.6% 28.4% 24% 21.6% 16.1% 16.2% Regents Diploma Advanced Regents Diploma Advanced Regents Diploma with Honors 1  Advanced Placement Courses All Scholars' Academy students may enroll in numerous Advanced Placement (AP) college level courses in addition to earning approximately twenty college credits through college partner, St. Francis College. OVERALL AP HIGHLIGHTS * Scholars' administered 516 Advanced Placement exams in 2018 * 264 students participated in taking an AP exam * 75.4% of students earned a 3 or higher, this is an 4.4% increase from 2017 * Scholars' passing rate is 14% higher than the global average and 11.3% higher than New York's average and 14.1% higher than the global average *68.9% AP Equity & Excellence Rating (% of students who scored 3 or higher on at least one AP exam during HS) Advanced Placement Courses: AP English Language, AP English Literature, AP Calculus AB, AP Calculus BC, AP Computer Science A, AP US History, AP World History, AP Chemistry, AP Biology, AP Physics C: Mechanics, AP Physics 1, AP Art History, AP Spanish Language & Culture, AP Psychology, and AP Music. In 2018 Advanced Placement Exam Results Included 49 AP Scholars (3 or higher on 3 or more exams); average score 3.07 21 AP Scholars with Honor (average score of at least 3.25 on all AP Exams AND scores of 3 or higher on four or more exams); average score 3.5 23 AP Scholars with Distinction (average score of at least 3.5 on all AP exams taken AND scores of 3 or higher on five or more exams); average score 4.03 5 National AP Scholars (average score of at least 4 on all AP Exams taken AND scores of 4 or higher on eight or more exams); average score 4.42 2018 Graduation Statistics  The average GPA for this class is 92.11  35% of students will graduate with Mastery in Math and 18% will graduate with Mastery in Science  100% of students in the graduating class will graduate with 97% earning college prepared status and 98% are considered college ready  100% of students will earn a Regents Endorsed Diploma, 96% will earn an Advanced Regents Diploma, and 33.5% will earn an Advanced Regents Diploma with Honors  They submitted 8 college applications per student on average, with an amazing 80% acceptance rate!  100% were accepted to a four year college and among those are many of the top colleges in the nation –CUNY Macaulay Honors College, CUNY Sophie Davis School of Biomedical Education, New York University, 2  Stony Brook, Binghamton, University of Pennsylvania, Columbia University, Cornell University, University of San Francisco, University of Southern California, MIT, Muhlenberg, Boston College, George Washington University, Stanford, Princeton, Brown, Northwestern University, and many more!  The graduates collectively earned over $19 million in scholarships! A supportive environment gives rise to these great academic results. As a two time Respect For All awarded school, the Scholars' Academy School-wide Comprehensive Advisory Program creates a supportive environment that buttresses the rigorous instructional program. Every staff member serves as a personal advisor to Advisory Circles (aligned to homeroom configurations) that meet at strategic intervals throughout the academic year. In addition, as a Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) school, the Scholars' Academy systematically celebrates students who CHART their way to being Outstanding Scholars who are college and career ready. Throughout the year at scheduled special assembly celebrations, one student from each class in middle school and from each grade in high school is honored. These students are selected by their teachers and peers based upon their demonstration of the school values for being: Cooperative, Hard-working, Amiable, Respectful, and Trustworthy. In addition to assemblies with their respective peers, middle school Outstanding Scholars and their parents join the principal for a monthly hot breakfast and ceremony and high school Outstanding Scholars are taken out to lunch with the principal to a local restaurant. To further enhance school culture and celebrate success, in 2018-2019, the entire school is engaging in a Principal's Focus Priority to expand the Advisory Program to 16 sessions while adding 8 uniquely scheduled Renaissance Retreat Days. During these breaks from the normal routine of school, students and staff will follow unique interest driven schedules to partake in enrichment activities and Advisory Tasks designed to: enhance social-emotional intelligence, student bonds, cultural understanding, and a love of learning. Students will also participate in workshops and assemblies from guest speakers, community based organizations, and staff based upon school data and grade/age appropriate needs. Collaborative teachers are critical to the success of the Scholars' Academy students. Scholars' teachers work extensively to share instructional ideas, such as how to better leverage technology in order to meet the needs of diverse learners through strategic universal and customized supports embedded in each lesson’s task. Early student dismissal on Friday afternoons permits the teachers to engage in weekly professional learning sessions to support student achievement and social emotional development. Teachers at the Scholars' Academy participate in collegial lesson studies multiple times per year. As an Innovation Zone Ambassador School , Scholars’ Academy consistently opens its doors to help education leaders and teachers from across the globe to learn how technology is leveraged to enhance student learning and strong family community ties through better home-school as well as internal staff communication. The students of Scholars' Academy also benefit from strong family-community ties. Scholars’ Academy has partnerships with community-based organizations such as: Millennium Development, Rockaway Waterfront Alliance, also known as RISE, and Rockaway Rotary Club; Higher Education Institutions such as: Queens College School of Education and St. Francis College; and Cultural/Arts Organizations such as: Broadway Jr. and the Magic Box Corporation. The primary career and college readiness partner of the Scholars’ Academy is Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc. Each year, Broadridge Executives provide career awareness trainings, on site shadowing opportunities, mentoring, college essay support, scholarships, and employment coaching, thereby helping Scholars' in pursuit of college and career readiness. Locally, Scholars' seniors also have the opportunity to apply for internships in community based workplaces or jobs through the TOPS Program. Scholars' Academy is an organized teaching and learning machine that is focused on continually nurturing its students, promoting and connecting with its community, while evolving instructional practices to prepare students for college and careers so that they may successfully pursue happiness in the 21st Century. 3  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Scholars' Academy is an exceptional and diverse learning organization that continually works to discover, learn, adapt, and adopt teaching practices that support a wide range of unique learners, including students who are Twice Exceptional. Scholars' Academy is engaged in the work of evolving and enhancing the development of Individualized Education Plans (IEP's) for all students so that all students have access to the accelerated curriculum for his/her maximum potential to be pursued. Although Scholars' Academy is designing instruction for all students to have tailored Individual Education Plans, approximately 12% of Scholars' Academy is made up of students with IEP's. Approximately 87% of students with IEP's spend greater than 60% of their academic week in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) Classes. To best serve this widening range of student needs, numerous additional teachers with special education licenses will continue to be hired, and ample technological as well as professional learning resources will be leveraged. Scholars' Academy continues to offer the highest performing students, regardless of IEP status or type, opportunities to take the most challenging courses, including high school Regents Courses in middle school and college or Advanced Placement Courses in high school. To accomplish this work, Scholars' Academy teachers engage in collegial professional learning sessions designed to assist their efficacy with designing instructional tasks that include universal and customized student supports. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In 2017-2018, based upon Danielson Analysis, feedback received from the superintendent, as well as feedback from an external Special Education Collaborative Consultant Group via our Grant Partner, Renaissance Charter High School, the school continued its focus on impacting Danielson Competences 3C and 1E. Throughout the year, teacher teams engaged in this work, via collaborative lesson studies and subject team meetings to improve and share best practices with regard to customized and universal students supports. As a result, the wider range of students across classrooms could participate meaningfully during instruction, thereby enhancing engagement through productive struggle due to teacher designed access to challenging learning material. For 2018-2019, with consideration of the large number of new staff on boarded in 2017-2018, and based upon Advance Danielson Competency Observation Evaluation Data, Scholars' Academy will continue its focus on competencies 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction) and 3C (Engaging Students in Learning). 2018-2019 Instructional Focus By engaging teachers in a collaborative professional learning process, specific to enhancing the learning tasks within each lesson plan, via the incorporation of universal and individual student learning supports, coupled with a structured triad scale-up group critique-based discussion protocol, student engagement, motivation, and achievement will increase. 4  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q323 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1376 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A 6 26 30 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 4 14 26 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 47.0% % Attendance Rate 37.6% % Reduced Lunch 0.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 19.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 42.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 0% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 93.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 100% 100% 100.0% 100.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES No N/A 60 44 3 95.8% 10.0% 11.6% 16.8% 19.6% 1.7% 8 13% 6.2 92.0% N/A 100% 100% 99.2% 84% N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A Scholars’ Academy mantra states: “In the Planning is the Teaching.” The Scholars’ Academy embodies a collaborative professional culture wherein teachers work together to support one another in their efforts to ensure that units, lessons, and rigorous learning tasks contain embedded supports for students. Using the Research-based Danielson Framework for Teaching, Scholars’ Academy continually assesses teacher prowess in multiple competency areas based upon data garnered from the Advance Teacher Evaluation System. Based upon the results of over 200 teacher observations, 3 lesson study session surveys, superintendent feedback pertaining to enhancing student universal supports designed for top tier learners, as well as feedback from Special Education Collaborative Consultants which recommended creating more customized supports for students with Individual Education Plans (IEP's), the 2018-2019 identified Instructional Focus intended to impact rigorous instruction will keep lesson planning, specifically lesson task design central to all professional learning. In 2017-2018, Scholars’ Academy focused its professional learning plan to impact Danielson Competency 1E, Designing Coherent Instruction, with the specific goal of including individualized and customized supports for students to engage in rigorous learning tasks, thereby enhancing 3C engagement. Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP) Observation Results Teacher Teams School Average ELA Social Studies Math Science Spanish Art PE/Fitness Year-Start 2/7/18 1E 3.52 3.19 3.49 4.00 3.00 3.40 3.83 3.45 4.00 3.59 3.25 3.14 3.57 3.83 3.58 3.89 3.52 3.74 3.45 3.33 3.51 3.40 3.39 3.42 3.57 3.82 3.60 3.81 3C Year-End 6/11/18 1E 3.46 3.5 3.71 3.55 3C 6  Mid-Year School Average ELA SS Math Science Spanish Art PE/Fitness % of Observations Scored HE 2/7/18 1A 1E 2A 2D 3B 3C 3D 4E 3.62 3.46 3.91 3.83 3.49 3.5 3.48 3.94 3.68 3.91 3.64 3.39 3.49 4.00 3.52 3.19 3.93 4.00 3.83 3.97 3.85 4.00 3.76 3.86 3.45 3.58 3.69 3.39 3.45 4.00 3.59 3.25 3.45 3.33 3.62 3.40 4.00 3.92 3.82 4.00 3.43 3.00 3.86 3.71 3.29 3.14 3.43 4.00 3.67 3.83 3.40 3.83 3.86 4.00 3.57 4.00 3.57 3.83 3.57 3.83 3.57 3.67 4.00 3.75 CEP Goal >60% 58.52% 54.47% End-Year School Average ELA SS Math Science Spanish Art PE/Fitness % of Observations Scored HE CEP Goal>60% 6/11/18 1A 1E 2A 2D 3B 3C 3D 4E 3.71 3.55 3.87 3.80 3.48 3.55 3.53 3.88 3.71 3.83 3.63 3.54 3.58 3.89 3.45 3.33 3.87 4.00 3.71 3.94 3.78 3.83 3.74 3.88 3.47 3.48 3.44 3.48 3.52 3.74 3.51 3.40 3.49 3.22 3.55 3.50 3.93 3.88 3.68 3.96 3.78 3.39 3.92 3.83 3.46 3.42 3.47 4.00 3.75 3.91 3.57 3.82 3.90 3.88 3.70 3.88 3.60 3.44 3.60 3.81 3.70 3.75 4.00 3.81 61.60% 60.08% When considering this data, coupled with the important task of ensuring that teaching practices continually evolve to be more supportive of the specific individual groups of student needs and assorted subgroups of students, such as students with disabilities, ELL’s, and students scoring in the top and bottom third on benchmark and summative assessments, the Rigorous Instruction Goal for 2018-2019 and School-wide Instructional Focus will emphasize enhancing 3C, with the inclusion of an emphasis on the continued creation/evolution of student supports coupled with a more structured approach to student small group (triad) based discussions. 2018-2019 Instructional Focus By engaging teachers in a collaborative professional learning process, specific to enhancing the learning tasks within each lesson plan, via the incorporation of universal and individual student learning supports, coupled with structured triad scale-up critique-based discussion protocol, student engagement, motivation, and achievement will increase. The task of challenging high performing students, while providing access to the most rigorous learning material possible for students with a wide range of learning tendencies, or who grapple daily with learner-specific obstacles requires our staff to focus on how to best motivate, support, and promote a resilient academic mindset in students. 7  Much of the work pertaining to this instructional focus will be based upon information learned from a June 2016 Theatlantic.com Article by Paul Tough titled, "How Kids Learn Resilience." In this article, Paul Tough highlights several research findings pertaining to student engagement and resilience in school. Tough cites the work of Camille A. Farrington who performed an exhaustive analysis of Mindset Research which highlighted four beliefs that, when adopted by students, result in student resilience in the classroom. According to Farrington, those beliefs are: 1. I belong in this academic community. 2. My ability and competence grow with my effort. 3. I can succeed at this. 4. This work has value for me. The above mentioned beliefs will remain central to the work of collaborative teacher teams in designing coherent instruction that is engaging for all learners via the creation of universal and customized learning supports within lesson task design. School Learning Environment Survey Data also supports the need to impact task design to enhance engagement by making more learning tasks relevant to the every day life experiences of students. (This work has value for me.) Survey results delineate that 77% of students agree/strongly agree that teachers make lessons relevant to their every day lives. 77% of students also say that their teachers use examples of different cultures, backgrounds, and families, in their lessons to make learning more meaningful. By focusing on engagement via cultural relevance, student motivation will increase. Qualitative analysis of observation data trends across classrooms also supports a more consistent need of using structured peer discussion protocols to impact student engagement and rigor. As a result the discussion protocol for group work will include the expectation of a peer to peer "critique" prompt. What was "Think, Scale, Share" will now become "Think, Scale, Share, Critique" to ensure students deepen their analysis of one another's view points of pivotal discussion questions posed by the teacher. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will design and enhance rigorous learning tasks within each lesson plan to embed universal and customized learning supports for all students, coupled with the use of a structured triad scale-up group critique-based discussion protocol, which will result in at least 60% of teacher observation evaluations scoring Highly Effective in Danielson Competency 3C Engaging Students in Learning. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning Team Input/Pre-work: 1. Create Professional Learning Plan Calendar delineating subject team session and lesson study dates pertaining to this goal. 2. Revise/Finalize Student Task Survey PL Team Members August 2018 Session for Pre-work Principal/Assistant Principal Administration Team Professional Learning Team pertaining to this goal to be used during fall/spring observations. September/October Planning January Analysis Session SLT sub-committee monthly Monitoring May Analysis Session June PL Team Session June 2018, September 2018 and continued throughout the school-year according to Professional Learning Calendar Intervals Team Specific Assistant Principals, IEP Team Members, and Professional Learning Team Members 3. Analyze subject team Student Task Survey Data to inform subject team task revisions, subject team sessions, and lesson studies. 4. Create in consultation with the principal a simple critique-based discussion protocol designed to prompt students to think, scale/share (in triad groups of three students), critique, and synthesize information. 5. Train teachers in the nuances and application of this protocol, who in turn, will train students in grades 6-12. 6. Collect survey/feedback from staff and students pertaining to the protocol and to revise as needed. IEP Team Pre-work: (1 staff from each subject area, with middle and high school representation) Feedback from Teacher Subject Teams) (Feedback from Students IEP Team Members Teachers will create, share and review Student IEP at a Glance Summary Sheets containing information about student goals, learning styles, preferences, needs and strengths. All Teachers All Teachers will then create Universal and Customized/Individual Student Supports, within the Scholars' Academy Instructional Scale-Up Model. 9  Subject Team Supportive Tasks Work: Each Subject Team 1. Focus on designing learning tasks that are: motivating, engaging, challenging, and require a student to student critique-based triad discussion protocol. 2. Create/Share a Menu of Supports for Various Subgroups of Students. 3. Analyze Student Post Observation Task Subject Team Data Point Person Survey Subject Team Averages regarding: Challenge/Motivation/Peer Critique Quality/Time on Task/and Consolidation of Learning Quality. Administrator of Respective Teacher Team 4. Based on student feedback and subject team observation data trends, teachers will refine and adjust practices within the Scholars’ Academy instructional models to enhance learning tasks and improve universal and customized/individual supports to better address student academic, social-emotional, and physical needs. 5. For the purpose of measuring the impact of lesson task designs, each subject team will track data and student work after each benchmark exam period to inform subject team planning, student grouping, unit/lesson planning, and supports. 6. Each Subject Team will analyze student observation task survey data by subgroups and submit benchmark exam data for subgroups of students to the administration: all students, SWD, ELLS, and Students in Lowest 1/3. According to Professional Learning Calendar Intervals Professional Learning Team Assistant Principals January and May Review of Student Task Survey Subject Team Data. Such Data will then be submitted to the Cabinet and SLT Agendas for Review/Feedback. Teachers/Guidance Counselors Data Inquiry Team Cabinet SLT January and May Review of Subject Team Danielson Data Trends/Averages 3C/Engagement. Such Data will then be submitted to the Cabinet and SLT Agendas for Review/Feedback. REVISED LESSON PLAN TEMPLATES BY SUBJECT SPECIFIC TEACHER TEAMS All Teachers by Subject Team August 2018 Professional Learning Team Teacher leaders on PL Team and AP's will meet to revise and collaborate to customize lesson plan templates specific to their respective subjects to include references to universal and customized supports. Teachers will maintain Student (Individual Education Plan (IEP) Summary Sheets for each section/class in order to have such readily available during the planning process in order to enhance their ability to Sept-June: Teacher Subject Teams During each of 2 Lesson Studies Mentors During Subject Team Meetings Assistant Principals 0  create universal and customized supports to address student strengths and needs. Spring 2019 Revisions Principal Lesson plans will reference the use of the "Student-Centered Active Learning Environment with Upside -down Pedagogies" (SCALE-UP) research-based instructional model adopted from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and North Carolina State University (NCSU). See: http://scaleup.ncsu.edu/ for more information. This instructional model/philosophy prompts teachers to plan lesson tasks that leverage individualized computing tools to engage students in task-based problem solving within a socialized learning environment, ultimately enhancing student engagement, motivation, and independence (Danielson Competency 3C). Each lesson plan will be expected to make a prediction for Time Really On Task (TROT) with regard to student engagement of both a verbal nature (during face to face discussions) and non-verbal format (electronic discussions, such as Google Classroom). Administrators will assess lesson plans for evidence of universal and customized individual learner supports. Administrators will share findings from observations pertaining to student/teacher discussion protocol use and inform PL team/subject team adjustments. Observation Feedback from Administrators will center upon analysis of student task survey data and competency 3c for purpose of assessing and providing feedback pertaining to planning for supporting student strengths and the impact noticed during an actual lesson. Teachers 2018-2019 Administrators Ongoing Cabinet SLT December March May 1  An internal assessment of each subject team's engagement average in Danielson Competency 3C and follow up will take place in January, March, and May at Administration Team meetings, which will then be shared with Cabinet and SLT. Teachers in each subject team will share how they have developed and utilized both universal and customized/individual supports during a lesson and across a unit of study for the purpose of obtaining feedback from peers in an electronic document. The ideas shared will inform the team’s subject specific bank of best practices. Teacher cohort and grade teams will meet across content areas on a scheduled basis to share and discuss explicit customized supports that were effective with specific individuals and groups of students. Teachers will share examples of how student learning is supported or extended through universal and customized supports. All Teachers Friday: Teacher Learning Sessions (PL) Professional Learning Team Teacher Subject Teams Lesson Studies Mentors will focus on Universal and Customized Individual Learner Supports (both subject specific and inter-disciplinary) Assistant Principals Principal A Fall and a Spring Lesson Study will center around the host teacher(s) sharing and receiving feedback pertaining to the universal and customized supports evident in the lesson for the purpose of the subject team witnessing the impact of the supports during the lesson. Subject Specific Teacher Teams Fall/Spring Teacher Teams During Lesson Study Rotations Assistant Principal Principal Lesson study will also include focus on critique-based discussion protocol implementation in planning and execution of process/via team observation of the lesson. These lesson studies will require several students to be focused upon via a pre and post interview, and examination of the lesson's impact upon the pre-identified students' work. 2  Student Task Survey data will be discussed during the lesson study debriefing session. Utilize special education licensed teachers to enhance IEP driven differentiation efforts and question prompts within tasks for students with disabilities Select Staff will attend professional external learning opportunities offered by FSC and/or Special Education Collaborative through Renaissance Charter High School Grant Partner. Student-led conferences at Parent Teacher Conferences will take place having students lead the discussions to address student learning goal and strategies that have been customized for their work to meet their respective learning goals. Workshops for Parents to raise awareness of types of supports and technology available to support the wide range of student learning needs. Invitations to the parents will be aligned with student need by subject team. All Teachers Friday PL Learning Sessions and Lesson Studies Professional Learning Team Teacher Subject Teams Assistant Principals Principal Grant Committee Administrators Select Teachers and Counselors As Available 2018-2019 Identified Students Fall & Spring Parent Teacher Conferences Teachers, Assistant Principals Parents via Assessed Need with Emphasis on ELL’s and SWD’s. During Curriculum Overview Night, PA Meetings & Parent Teacher Conferences. Staff Developers/Mentors Technician Translation Team Guidance Staff Key Teachers Assistant Principals 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Special Education Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In addition to special workshops for new parents during incoming student orientation sessions, all parents are invited to attend a Curriculum Overview event in addition to Parent Teacher Conferences in the Fall. During this Curriculum Overview event, parents will receive course and teacher specific insight into how they may best support their children at home. Teachers will continue to add instructional and tutorial screen cast videos to homework assignments to assist parents who are able to help their children with homework, and/or to foster student self-sufficiency and independence. Selected Students will share screen cast testimonials specific to their learning at Spring Parent Teacher Conferences. Workshops will be organized and arranged by grade and course to help parents leverage the school's online electronic resources that will support the acceleration of student learning. The school's technician will also host small group parent workshops based on direct need and inquiry. Key school staff will facilitate parent workshops during designated monthly Parent Association Meetings. Parents will also attend and participate in several celebrations of rigorous instruction such as: STEM Family Night (Formerly the Science Symposium and Family Math Night), Reading Celebration Night, and Music and Arts Celebrations. Parents will have access to all curriculum materials via the Internet. The parents of students with IEP's will receive specific information re: customized supports for their children during annual meetings with key staff, as well as receive progress reports three-four times per year. 4  All parents, including parents of students who are ELLs, have IEP's, or who are performing in the lowest third, will have access to student grades, behavioral anecdotal information, and course progress via online resources delineated in Section 4a/Budget and Resource Alignment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per Session Funds for Teachers, Counselors, and Teacher Team Administrators to periodically track progress toward this goal,  Additional IEP/Reading and Special Education Teachers to Lead and Focus Support of Task Design Adjustments and Track Data of SWD’s and ELL’s,, Strategic Professional Learning Calendar to Ensure Cyclical Process, iPads, Chromebooks,   Use of Translation Team Members, Support of Parent Association, etc., and  Per Session Funds to Support Teacher Team work, such as the Professional Learning Team, Data Inquiry Team, Youth Development Team, etc.  Contract for Excellence Funds to sustain the use of electronic resources that enhance learning and home-school communication for students with IEP's, ELLS, and/or students performing in the lowest third tier on standardized assessments: Datacation, iLearn Online Courses, Naviance, Blackboard Connect, Goalbook, and Moby Max.  TL NYSTL Funds to finance Software such as: Castle Learning, Learning Ally, Newsela, etc.  TL NYSTL Funds to finance the acquisition of technology equipment such as: Chromebooks, iPads, laptops, and desktops.  Contract for Excellence Funds to acquire materials/equipment/1:1 tutoring face to face or online tutoring needed for middle and high school instructional changes to support this goal's attainment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Scholars’ Academy will monitor progress for attaining this goal in a cyclical fashion using the Learning to Improve, How America’s Schools Can Get Better at Getting Better, Cycles of Learning approach: Plan, Implement, Assess, and Adjust. In addition to weekly administration team check-ins to ensure implementation needs can be met in an on-going fashion, there will be 3 specific checkpoints that will be followed for implementation progress to be assessed, and adjusted if necessary. There will be 3 expected checkpoints and such checkpoint data will be shared at the SLT Meetings for continuous focus, monitoring, and adjustment. The checkpoints will be : 5  1. End of December 2018/January 2019 Data Collection: Data tracking teacher HE ratings in 3C will be shared at the January School Leadership Team Meeting. Minimum Benchmark of 60% is mid-year target. 2. End of March 2019 Data Collection: Data will be shared at the 1 st March SLT Meeting. 3. End of May 2019: Data will be shared at the 1 st May and June SLT Meeting. Note: Mid-Year Targets of Danielson Competency Highly Effective to be Analyzed: 3C Target 40%-60% of staff HE. Mid-Year Data Analysis  3C Engaging Students in Learning Assessment by Subject Team and by Staff  Mid-Year Target Analysis  Mid-Year Administrator Analysis of Observation Feedback re: structured triad use and Think, Scale, Share, Critique Protocol. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Data will be collected from Advance Evaluation System: The percentage of teachers scoring in Highly Effective in Danielson Competency 3C will be collected and analyzed. Whole School Data and Subject Team Data will be organized and analyzed for presentation to the Cabinet Team and School Leadership Team by the Administrative Team. Student work samples by subject team will be shared within each subject team and with administrators. Student Subgroup Benchmark Exam results will be tracked and shared with Administration Team after each assessment period. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Scholars' Academy has a student mentoring and Positive Behavioral Intervention Supports (PBIS) Committee, as well as a structured, school-wide Student Advisory Program which have contributed the school's earning of “Respect for All” status over multiple years. As a result of the work to enhance school climate and culture, students at the Scholars' Academy have responded positively to surveys designed to assess how well students: "make strong personal connections with their peers," "have an adult that they trust or confide in and can go to with a problem," and "connect with each others cultures and backgrounds." An Advisory Task Force was recruited and funded (after contractual hours) to schedule, group, plan, and create specific activities for advisory groups. Throughout the academic year, the entire student body of 1,352 students engaged simultaneously in the Scholars’ Academy Advisory Initiative. After each Advisory Session, students and advisors were surveyed to better inform the evolution of the program as the year unfolded. The data below supports the demand by both students and staff to continue the Advisory Program in 2017-2018. Advisory Feedback from Students Summary of results from Learning Environment Survey Data Relevant to Creating a Supportive Environment There is a need to support students by working to represent or better connect them to their lessons so that learning is made more meaningful and motivational. The principal held culture-based discussions with small focus groups of students in February of 2018, at which time students articulated that they would like to see and engage the curriculum through a wider cultural lens than they have thus far experienced from the early grades. Students articulated that this would make them feel more connected, respected, and part of what they were learning, which would serve to better motivate them. 77% of students stated that their teachers use examples of different cultures, backgrounds, and families in their lessons to make learning more meaningful. This data lags the city and borough by 4%. 7  77% of students stated that their teachers make the lessons relevant to their every day experiences. This data ties the borough data and slightly outperforms the city data by 2%. 64% of students stated that most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching. Although this data outperforms the borough and city by more than 10%, given the work thus far with regard to PBIS, better results could be attained. 64% of students stated that their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. Although this could be perceived as an academic form of support, the "noticing," or perception that such is lacking may imply a distance gap between student and teacher that must be engaged. 60% of teachers surveyed stated that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students. This data implies that teachers are aware of student to student negative interactions, which implies the question, what is being done at the classroom level to impact this in a positive way? In addition to survey data, qualitative observation data also revealed in math and science class, for example, there have been lessons witnessed with computational math in isolation as a discipline in and of itself. In humanities, tasks would benefit by some external application component to an current day external connection (writing letter to senator), or community connection (assessing quality of Beach Cleanliness and impact on local species). Based on the student and teacher perception surveys and OORS data, it is evident that students need to improve their peer bonds, as well as their social and emotional intelligence and cultural understanding, in order to enhance their relationships with others and improve their decision making skills. Feedback from teachers surveyed also encouraged the shift to advisors being aligned to homeroom teachers for improved/increased frequency of interaction/familiarity among students and teacher/advisor. Student and teacher survey feedback also called for an increase in the frequency and quality of advisory sessions. Analysis of this data supports the necessity to support both teachers and students with regard to their social and emotional intelligence and mutual cultural understanding. By creating an Advisory Task Force/Youth Development Team driven plan to enhance student peer bonds and bonds between teachers and students through improved emotional intelligence and mutual cultural respect, students will be better focused and engaged on learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 8  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CEP Goal: By June 2019, the Youth Development Team and the Advisory Task force will implement a differentiated staff and student supportive learning plan designed to improve peer bonds, as well as their social and emotional intelligence and cultural understanding, demonstrated through a 2% increase in a student self perception and teacher-student perception surveys over three intervals throughout the school year. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Advisors will work with their Homerooms throughout the year for 8 Advisory Sessions. In addition, there will be 8 retreat days where students will take part in Advisory, as well as a full day of enrichment and SEL work. Ultimately, there will be 16 Advisory Sessions in 2018-2019. Additional support sessions will be held monthly using an extended homeroom model to enhance the social, emotional and cultural understanding of students. The principal and assistant principals will highlight the case for change and launch the Youth Development Team's more detailed work with grade teachers to develop a cohesive year-long curriculum map for students in grades 6 through 12 that will enhance students skills such as: Peer Relationships, Social and Emotional Learning, and cultural understanding. Students will be engaged in a year-long SEL Unit which will target a different aspect of the SEL Rubric during both Advisory Sessions and during Retreat Days and Enrichment Programs. Tentative SEL Rubric Monthly Focuses: September/October: Self-Awareness   October/November: Self-Management  November/December: Social Awareness All teachers, Advisors and Advisees Planning and Scheduling done in Summer 2018 based upon Table of Organization. Ongoing throughout the year Youth Development Team Members All students in grades 6-12 June and Summer Planning Activities; Principal, Assistant Principals,  September/October: Self-Awareness  October/November: Self-Management  November/December: Youth Development Team Members, teachers and Grade Leaders  Social Awareness January/February: Relationship Skills and Self-Awareness  March/April: Self-Management  May: Self-Awareness  June: Self-Management 0   January/February: Relationship Skills and Self-Awareness  March/April: Self-Management  May: Self-Awareness  June: Self-Management The Youth Development Team will examine teacher survey data three times a year that measures students peer bonds, social and emotional intelligence, and cultural understanding to enhance advisory sessions and monthly extended homeroom youth development sessions. All Teachers Survey Data will be reported to the principal and administration team for discussion at SLT for feedback. All students September, February and May teachers and students will complete a Youth Development survey regarding students emotional, social and academic growth Youth Development Team Members Administrators SLT The Youth Development Team will examine student survey data three times per year that measures the students' perception of their peer bonds, as well as their social and emotional intelligence and cultural understanding. The working definitions for each Advisory Focus are:  A socially mature student can self-manage, is goal-directed, self-aware, makes responsible decisions, and has strong relationship skills.  An emotionally mature student is someone who is emotionally aware, who manages his/her emotions, and who manages conflicts/disappointments/hard times in a mature manner.  An culturally intelligent student manages and express emotions in relationships, respecting diverse viewpoints and recognizes and appreciates individual and group similarities and differences. The survey questions for students will include: 1  A scale of 1-4, where students will rate themselves on the three main aspects of our CEP goal: to improve peer bonds, social and emotional intelligence, and cultural understanding.    The survey questions for teachers will include:  A scale of 1-4, where teachers will rate their students' proficiency on the three main aspects of our CEP goal: to improve peer bonds, social and emotional intelligence, and cultural understanding.    Schedule two 2 hour summer planning sessions and monthly Youth Development Team Sessions to plan monthly focus check in sessions Youth Development Team August - June Sensitivity training and online workshops will take place throughout the school year to heighten teacher awareness of students' emotional states. Youth Development Team September through June The Youth Development Team along with grade leaders, guidance counselors, and students will develop monthly focused sessions that will enhance student social skills, emotion management skills, and skills to improve academic performance. Each advisory session will incorporate small group discussions to better support the unique needs of students with disabilities, English language learners and other high need student subgroups who benefit from a more intimate low stress supportive environment. Guest Speakers will conduct parent workshops connected to the Social and Emotional Learning (SEL) competency focus of the month. Engaging Town Hall Safety Meetings with parents will focus on student social and emotional intelligence as well as the SEL competencies (self-awareness, self-August through June Youth Development Team All students During the 16 advisory sessions and Retreat Days Parents Fall/Spring Parents Fall / Spring Principal (2 AP's) Youth Development Team Members Youth Development Team Meeting Cabinet SLT Youth Development Team Youth Development Team Youth Development Team Youth Development Team 2 management, social awareness, relationship skills, and responsible decision making). The youth development team will conduct workshops with identified students to support them with creating study plans and tips for organizing their materials. Teachers will review student perception data with the grade level guidance counselors to discuss further ways to support the students academic needs. Spring Teachers, guidance and students Guidance, teachers and the youth development team The youth development team will reach out to organizations such as Beautiful Me, motivational speakers, and SAPIS to conduct parent, student and teacher workshops. Guidance, parents and students Spring Guidance team will conduct small group counseling sessions to target students that rate themselves low on the student perception survey. Guidance and teachers October, March and May Youth Development Team Youth Development Team and grade level guidance counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and caregivers will be made aware of each advisory session's focus in advance. Parents will also receive advisory focus related articles, conversation starters, and/or additional resources in order to deepen their understanding of how they may provide a support for their children at home. Youth Development Team members will disseminate this information in accordance with each advisory session. In addition, there will be 1-2 Town Hall Safety Meetings in which parents will be invited into school to discuss the social and emotional intelligence of the students during parent workshops. Guest speakers will also be brought in to meet with parents to discuss strategies and tools that can be implemented at home to further the progress of this goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Key Members Maintained of Advisory Task Force, Advisory Literature, Creation of Advisory “plug and play” Activities, Per Session Funding, Consultants if Available via Grant Partnership with Renaissance Charter High School, Motivational Supplies Funding, Parent Association Support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 3  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Scholars’ Academy will monitor Progress for attaining this goal in a cyclical fashion using the Learning to Improve, How America’s Schools Can Get Better at Getting Better, Cycles of Learning approach: Plan, Implement, Assess, and Adjust. In addition to weekly check-ins to ensure implementation needs can be met in an on-going fashion, there will be 3 specific checkpoints that will be followed for implementation progress to be assessed, and adjusted if necessary. There will be 3 expected checkpoints and such checkpoint data will be shared at Cabinet and at the SLT Meetings for continuous focus, monitoring, and adjustment. The checkpoints will be : 1. October 2018 (Baseline) 2. March 2019 (Midyear Target of 1% increase) 3. May 2019 (Check on attainment of 2% increase) Mid-Year Data Review  Student perception survey data: o Beginning of the year data average score: o Mid-year data average score is  Teacher perception survey data: o Beginning of the year data average score: o Mid-year data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student survey data collected three times a year (October, March, and May) will measure the impact of Advisory sessions upon: peer bonds, cultural understanding, use of social-emotional intelligence (impact of trainings), and impact of workshops. I know what makes me upset, angry, frustrated, or stressed. 1. 2. When I am stressed, I know what to do to make myself feel better. 3. I am able to respect, appreciate, listen to and understand the cultures of others when they are different from my own. I am able to control and share my emotions with classmates while respecting their opinions and perspectives. I am able to make decisions I am proud of based on what I think is right even if it differs from what others believe. I understand that each decision I make has a positive or negative consequence in the future. 4. 5. 6. 4 7. I use strategies learning from Advisory (social emotional learning) to more positively impact my relationships with peers from other cultures and backgrounds. Teacher survey data collected three times per year will measure the impact of teacher perception of student peer bonds, use of SEL strategies, and cultural understanding. 1. My students know what makes them upset, angry, frustrated, or stressed. 2. When my students are stressed, they know what to do to make themselves feel better. 3. Students are able to respect, appreciate, listen to and understand the cultures of others when they are different from their own. 4. My students are able to control and share their emotions with classmates while respecting others opinions and perspectives. 5. My students are able to make decisions they are proud of based on what they think is right even if it differs from what others believe. 6. My students understand that each decision they make has a positive or negative consequence in the future. 7. My students are comfortable and able to engage in controversial discussions in a respectful manner in the classroom. I am comfortable teaching Social Emotional Learning Strategies to my students. 8. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Throughout the 2017-2018 school year, the Professional Learning Team, Administrative Team, and School Leadership Team discussions revealed a thematic need to continue to ensure that the school begins each year with a scheduled and specific cyclical Professional Learning Plan that is designed to support the attainment of multiple subject team and school goals. Teacher development is critical to student achievement. Therefore, the professional learning plan must be designed to engage teachers in a collaborative quest to learn about, develop, and share new pedagogical techniques that enhance their ability to perform at effective and highly effective levels within the Danielson Framework, specifically with regard to Competency 1E, Designing Coherent Instruction for the purpose of enhancing Competency 3C, Student Engagement. Although analysis of Danielson 2017-2018 data indicates that the school met its target with regard to 60% of teachers scoring HE in Competencies 1E and 3C, the threshold by which these targets were met is marginal, 61.6% for 1E and 60.08% for 3C. When coupled with fact that mid-year data came in at 58.52% and 54.47% respectively, there is concern that there could be a loss of traction with regard to these competencies in 2018-2019. Additional data analyzed from weekly teacher surveys conducted after each Friday professional learning session indicates that teachers experienced great value from participation in cyclical collegial lesson studies focused on a specific enhancing lesson plan task design. In 2018-2019, teacher collaboration will be enhanced by an increase in professional learning time dedicated to subject specific and whole staff professional learning sessions during which teachers will examine student work, assessment data, unit plans, lesson plans, tasks, and assessment strategies, etc., in order reinforce and evolve the school's common pedagogical language and Scholars' Academy Signature Instructional Best Practices. 6  In order to ensure that this focus upon 1E impacts 3C, and consistent with the school’s instructional focus, lesson plans will be prepared that articulate universal and customized student supports that guide, empower, and liberate students toward obtaining their individual education plan goals and learning objectives. It is through the design of these supports that teachers will be better able to motivate, engage, and meet the varying needs of the diverse learners in each classroom, including English language learners and students with special needs so that all students may pursue their maximum potential in every course of study. To further impact 3C, engagement, and to also impact the quality of 3B, Questioning and Discussion Techniques which came in as the lowest overall competency for the school at 3.48, supportive learning task design will also include with an emphasis on including a structured peer discussion and critiquing protocol. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Scholars’ Academy will implement a comprehensive collaborative professional learning plan that supports teacher readiness to engage in at least 2 collegial lesson study cycles, and a minimum of 6 subject team specific student support design sessions, which will improve universal and customized learning supports for students, resulting in at least 60% of teacher observation evaluations rated Highly Effective in Danielson Competency 1E Designing Coherent Instruction. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning Team will design a cyclical professional learning calendar, which incorporates 2 lesson study cycles and a minimum of 6 subject specific sessions designed to impact the quality of universal and customized learning supports included in each lesson's task. Subject team leaders, PL team members and AP's will evaluate the subject specific lesson plan templates and adjust to ensure: Scale-Up Role Clarity to Enhance Engagement, TROT/Engagement Reference, and Universal, and Customized Individual Learning Supports. Lesson studies will focus on assessed subject team needs with an emphasis on the difference between universal and customized learning supports based on student individual education plans as well as incorporation of critique-based triad discussion protocol. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Team August 2018 - June 2019 Professional Learning Team and Administration Grade Team Leaders Teachers Math, Science, Humanities, Spanish, Arts, Fitness Teams Templates will be assessed in October/November, January, and May Subject Team Leader Assistant Principals October and March Assistant Principals Professional Learning Team Members Principal Teacher Teams ICT Partners Administrators Professional Learning Team Special Education Teachers Special education-licensed teachers will meet with general education-licensed teachers to share effective student support strategies and student at a glance IEP summary sheets in order to enhance teacher task design/planning of customized and universal supports. Special Education Teachers and Teachers with Strong Differentiation/Assessment Design Practice Planning will take place in August & September 2018 8  Subject team sessions will take place 6 times during the school year to develop and assess the use of universal and customized student supports to best enhance student content knowledge and critical thinking skills. Assistant Principals and Professional Learning Team Teachers of each subject team will enhance unit, lesson, and task plans to incorporate universal and customized learning supports that promote Depth of Knowledge (DOK) Levels 3 and 4 critical thinking skills, which will enhance student mastery of the respective subject's content. Meetings will take place ICT Partners September 2018 through June 2019 according to PL Calendar September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals Professional Learning Team IEP Teacher ICT Partners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers receiving tenure will be celebrated and highlighted for their specific prowess at the September Parent Association Meeting. Parents will meet teachers at Curriculum Night where they will learn about how they may assist their children at home and specifically learn about how to access teacher unit, lesson, and task plans via the school's online landing page. Ample workshops and event opportunities will be created by the Professional Learning Team, Youth Development Team, and College Office for families to learn about how school instructional programs will support student learning. Workshops and events may will include: Reading Celebration Night, Habits of Mind Parent Workshops, STEM Family Night, ELA and Math Common Core Workshops, Testing Workshops, etc. Principal's Monthly Parent Association Reports will periodically share progress and work toward this goal, celebrating teacher professional learning. Parents will be engaged, in an on-going fashion, via Pupil Path and Skedula. Workshops of various topics will be provided at numerous Parent Association Meetings by teachers and counselors (youth development, core subject, college applications, etc..). 9  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff expertise of special education teachers is critical to informing differentiated task design. Subject team expertise is critical to sharing best practices for assessing and planning for assessment within lesson. Consultants may be obtained pending funding availability or via support from collaborative grant partnership with Renaissance Charter High School. Per Diem funding is critical to cover teachers participating in lesson observations during lesson study cycle. Per session funding is needed to pay for June and August planning and on-going Advisory Task Force support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Scholars’ Academy will monitor Progress for attaining this goal in a cyclical fashion using the Learning to Improve, How America’s Schools Can Get Better at Getting Better, Cycles of Learning approach: Plan, Implement, Assess, and Adjust. In addition to weekly check-ins to ensure implementation needs can be met in an on-going fashion, there will be 3 specific checkpoints that will be followed for implementation progress to be assessed, and adjusted if necessary. There will be 3 expected checkpoints and such checkpoint data will be shared at Cabinet and at the SLT Meetings for continuous focus, monitoring, and adjustment. The checkpoints will be : 1. January 2019 (Minimum Target of 50% HE Observations in Competency 1E) 2. March 2019 (Maintain Target of 50% HE Observations in Competency 1E) 3. May 2019 (Final Assessment 60% HE in 1E) Mid-Year Data Review Track 1E Schoolwide and by Subject Team and Analyze Trends Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. At three intervals throughout the year: January, March, and May 2019. Post Lesson Study Teacher Surveys, Post Advisory Session Teacher Surveys, and 0  Review of Overall Danielson Competency Average Evaluations of the percent of teachers scoring Highly Effective in 1E. Danielson Data will be Assessed in January, March, and May 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Scholars’ Academy’s organizational system has a strong Quality Review-backed track record for its ability to mobilize numerous stake-holders in order to pursue the school’s goals and objectives. Scholars’ Academy has consistently received Well-Developed and Outstanding Quality Review Ratings. Student, teacher, and parent survey ratings have been consistently positive. The 2017-2018 Scholars’ Academy High School Snapshot indicates that Scholars’ Academy earned "Excellent" scores in every category: Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership, Strong Family-Community Ties, and Trust. The individual and collective success of the Scholars’ Academy is buttressed by the collaborative and trusting culture that exists within the flat nature of the organization, ultimately enhancing its ability to harness individual innovation for potential cross-organization pollination. The teaming structures of Scholars’ Academy are organized so that school leaders (principal, assistant principals, lead teachers, grade instructional leaders, and various team leaders (career and college readiness, professional learning, safety, data inquiry, etc.) overlap and interconnect, fueling a culture of intense work ethic and high expectations. At the teacher team level, subject team members routinely and systematically collaborate to plan/revise units, lessons, tasks, and assessments, so that they may then analyze data trends and adjust instructional practices, in a cyclical and on-going fashion. Ownership, high standards, and the intensity to do better permeate each level of this teaching and learning organization. School Quality Snapshot Data from 2017-2018 indicates that 94% of respondents (Teachers, Students, and Parents) replied positively to questions pertaining to Effective School Leadership. Most recent School Quality Guide Learning Environment Survey Data from 2017-2018 present the following scores: 2  2017-2018 Overall Effective Leadership Score 4.04 4.20: Inclusive Leadership (Parent Survey) 95% Positive (+2% over district and +4% over city average) 3.54: Teacher Influence (Teacher Survey) 86% Positive (+7% over district and +2% over city average) 4.50: Program Coherence (Teacher Survey) 94% Positive (+9% over district and +16% over city average) 3.92: Instructional Leadership (Teacher Survey) 91% Positive (+6% over district and +7% over city average) 4.20: Parent Principal Trust (Parent Survey) 96% Positive (+1% over district and +4% over city average) 3.80: Teacher Principal Trust (Teacher Survey) 89% Positive (+11% over district and +6% over city average) Given the success of the school with regard to developing, cultivating, and enhancing “Effective School Leadership,” the goal to enhance systematic practices and protocols across other support teams of the organization will be focused upon in 2018-2019 in order to better standardize and ritualize information flow to the cabinet and school leadership teams, who in turn, will provide a wider perspective of feedback to the reporting teams. The reporting teams will enhance their productivity and focus by following the protocol of the Cycle of Learning (Plan, Implement, Assess, Adjust), ultimately reporting internally and to the cabinet and school leadership team at three specific time-bound check points. This goal is designed to deepen the current Scholars’ Academy’s success with regard to networked improvement communities by engaging key identified teams in a structured process of Plan, Do, Study, Act (PDSA) upon problems of practice that their respective teams face. The teams that will be focused upon in 2018-2019 are: ● Professional Learning Team ● Youth Development Team (Partnered with the Advisory Task Force) ● College and Career Readiness Team, and ● School Implementation Team (Supporting SWD) Part 2 – Annual Goal 3  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the leaders of 4 teams, critical to Scholars’ Academy functioning, will engage their respective teams in at least 3 Cycles of Learning Protocol (COLP) sessions on team-specific Problems of Practice (POP) which will enhance ownership and accountability, as demonstrated by an increase of 5% of each team's perception of ownership and accountability on start and end year Surveys. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In June 2018, key leaders from each team represented will participate in planning sessions to discuss and learn about this CEP Goal and the Cycles of Learning Protocol (COLP) and ensure a plan is in place to engage each respective team in the COLP. In June 2018, each team’s leader will engage with his/her respective team leaders in a protocol to ascertain a specific goal or problem of practice to focus upon for 2018-2019. Dean/ 6/2018 to 9/2018 Principal Safety Director Assistant Principals Assistant Principals Director of College and Career Readiness Director of Professional Learning, Principal Dean Leaders of Each Team 6/2018 to Principal 9/2018 Assistant Principals Director of College and Career Readiness Leaders of Each Team 5  In August/September of 2018, each team will revisit and create/revise/become oriented re: their respective goals and action plans, as well as specific measurable data to track/refine their work throughout the year. Youth Development Team Leaders Professional Learning Director SIT Leader Members of Teams: Professional Learning Director/Leaders of Each Team Report to Cabinet and School Leadership Team 8/2018-6/2019 3 Specific Check Points: September Youth Development December/January College and Career Readiness School Implementation (SWD) April/May Each team leader and a designee will alternate to share data points with Cabinet and SLT at two checkpoints throughout the year, in order to bring feedback to their teams to continue the Cycles of Learning process. Leaders of Each Team listed above. Cabinet and SLT Directors of Each Team Report to Principal, Cabinet, and SLT Team Designees 6 During the two cycles, when reporting their POP data, each team will specify how their work and data are impacting students with disabilities, English language learners and other high need student subgroups. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As a part of each team's respective problems of practice, goals and action plans, there will be action items for parent and caregiver workshops, meetings, communication and opportunities for feedback. The leaders of each team and or their designees will facilitate these parent engagement opportunities. These events and forms of communication will take place several times throughout the year. Such as: - Financial Aid Night - Career Fair - College Fair - High School Application Process - Internet Safety Workshop - Learning how to use Tech Tools - Learning how to monitor your child's electronic devices - Outstanding Scholar Assemblies/Breakfasts - Honor Society Ceremonies - Growth Mindset Workshop - Getting to know your Child's IEP Workshop - Attention Disorder Workshop -Autism Workshop Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  Per Session, Key Personnel, College Readiness Charter School Collaboration Grant Partner Resources, Meeting Time, Printed Resources: “Learning to Improve” by Bryk, et al, and online NYCDOE resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Scholars’ Academy will monitor Progress for attaining this goal in a cyclical fashion using the Learning to Improve, How America’s Schools Can Get Better at Getting Better, Cycles of Learning approach: Plan, Implement, Assess, and Adjust. In addition to weekly check-ins to ensure implementation needs can be met in an on-going fashion, there will be 3 specific checkpoints that will be followed for implementation progress to be assessed, and adjusted if necessary. College Office Team, School Implementation Team, Youth Development Team and Professional Learning Team will each report to Cabinet and SLT in: 1. September: Initial electronic POP Sharing in September 2018 to Cabinet and SLT. 2. Mid-year in December/January 2019: POP designee will report in person at SLT Meeting. 3. End-year in April/ May 2019: POP designee from each team will report in person to SLT and share status/progress with Cabinet Team electronically. Note: Targets to be Analyzed by SLT Note: 2/4 teams will be on track for meeting their Problem of Practice Mid-Year Target 4/4 teams will be on time with data for SLT review All Teams will be shared by the 1 st May SLT Meeting and each team will begin process of formulating Problems of Practice based on 2018-2019 results for 2019-2020. Survey Based Progress Monitoring Ownership and Perception Survey will be administered by each team to establish a baseline for anticipated 5% growth of team perception of ownership and accountability. 8  Mid-Year Progress Monitoring Review: Each team will be surveyed mid-year (January, 2019) and adjustments will be made based upon survey data. From baseline an average team overall 5% increase from the initial baseline will be the mid-year target that indicates how to adjust and follow up with work on this goal. Mid-Year Data/Survey Results: End of Year: Final survey will be administered to measure impact of team perception of ownership and accountability to this goal of maintaining a 5% increase in team member and overall team perception of accountability and understanding of the work pertaining to this problem of practice. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data collected from teams will be used to assess progress on individual goals. The cabinet and SLT will analyze each team's Problem of Practice data at three checkpoint times to assess whether the respective teams are meeting their goals. Such data, progress tracking, and feedback will be maintained and tracked by SLT in a shared google document. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Scholars' Academy holds several school events to celebrate student talent and their outstanding contributions throughout the year that are very well attended by their parents, caregivers such as:  Monthly 7am Outstanding Scholar Breakfasts  Curriculum Night/Meet the Staff in September  Annual Reading Night in October  Annual Winter Concert in December  HS Theater Production in January Family STEM Night / Pi Day in March   Annual Spring Arts & Music Concert  MS Theater Production in May  HS Sports Awards Dinner in May  Honor Society Ceremonies in June  Graduation Ceremonies in June The goal this year is focused on increasing parent attendance at enrichment events to enhance Strong Family Community Ties. These three events have been strategically selected and planned to take place in three different geographic locations representing the various communities within which parents and caregivers reside: 1. Rockaway Peninsula, Queens 2. Mainland District 27, Queens 3. Brooklyn Note: Additional data was analyzed for the formulation and rationale for this CEP Goal. Data in this section is from the NYC School Survey, the Quality Review Strong Family-Community Ties Score 2017-2018 4.29 out of 5, Increased from prior year's 3.83. Outreach:  Percent Positive: 96% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their children learn.  92% of families say they had opportunities to visit their child's classroom.  97% say they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school.  94% say the teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. 0   96% say they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school.  98% say their school communicates with them in a language they can understand. Parent Involvement:  72% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school.  90% say they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance.  93% say they have seen their child's projects, artwork, homework, tests, or quizzes.  92% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or school event.  95% of families say they are likely to go to a regularly scheduled parent-teacher conference with their child's teacher.  95% of families say that the principal at their school works hard to build trusting relationships with families like them. Review of this data indicates that parent satisfaction is very high. Parent attendance at school Student led Parent Teacher Conferences is high. Parent attendance at key workshops, Family STEM Night, Curriculum Overview, etc. is high. However, family attendance at Parent Association Meetings seems to be compromised by the internet based communications that the school has enhanced over time. Discussion with Parent Association Executive Board and School Leadership Team revealed that parent attendance at face to face Parent Association Meetings may be decreasing due to the effectiveness of on-going communication with teachers, the school's robust website and Pupil Path web-based resources, as well as communications from the principal and parent coordinators. The Parent Association also reported a decrease in Annual Fund Contributions. As a result, this goal is designed to:  Bring parents and students together in a non-stressful and non-academic environment to socialize and build community.  Raise funds for numerous enrichment activities that may then be deployed with collaboration of Parent Association and Principal based upon school needs and priorities.  Demonstrate respect to our school's geographic student origins so all families can participate in a Scholars' face to face event. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. CEP Goal 5: By June 2019, Scholars’ Academy Parents, Staff, and Students will organize and promote 3 FUN-draising Events to promote strong family and community ties that generate an average of 5% of the school population’s attendance/participation. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Parent Coordinator, Students, Parents and Caregivers Event Planning will begin in August 2018. Event will take place in September 2018. Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team, Administration, Grade Leaders, Grade Teams, Technician, Deans, and Student Government  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Coordinator will serve as CEP Goal #5 Liaison to Coordinate Events Liaison recruits/forms a student promotion committee and parent/staff planning/support committee Permits/Venues Booked Event Dates: 1. September 27/Curriculum Overview Night: Movie Night, 2. February Paint it Valentine’s Red Night, and 3. June: Seawolves Psych Up for the Cyclones Family Night) Parent Coordinator Create Time line of To Do’s: For each event: organize, communicate/promote, incentive, and monetize Collect Feedback from participants to inform next event Track Attendance for Each Event to Report to SLT after Each. 2  Event # 1: A movie night / curriculum overview event will be planned for Thursday, September 27, 2018. This event will take place at The Scholars, Academy, located in Rockaway. Event Planning: Grade leaders will work with teacher teams to plan the curriculum overview event where parents and caregivers will learn about their child's courses, as well as the online learning tools they may use to support their child's learning throughout the school-year. Parent coordinator, teacher leaders and assistant principals will create rotational schedules so parents and caregivers are able to meet with their child's core teachers. Deans, school leadership team members and student government will work to plan the movie night which will take place in the school-yard during the parent curriculum overview event. Students will complete a survey to select a movie for the event from a pre-determined list of options. Details such as permits, snacks, dress code, inclement weather plan will need to be determined and shared with cabinet and SLT. Flyers and pupilpath blasts (in parent home languages) will be sent to parents, caregivers and students to advertise these events. Incentives, such as dress down day passes will be distributed to students who attend the movie night / assist with the curriculum overview event. Students will also receive a dress down day pass if their parent/caregiver attends the curriculum overview event. Attendees will be asked to complete a survey google form to provide the team with feedback on the event in order to enhance future events. 3  Attendance will be tracked and feedback obtained to enhance. Event # 2: Parents Note: Due to venue availability, Parent Paint Night took place in the Rockaways at the Knights of Columbus Hall. and Caregivers The plan below was implemented and an additional FUNdraiser was organized via the Parent Association at Chipotle in Howard Beach, a mainland location. A Parent/Caregiver Paint Night event will be planned in February of 2019. This event will be located on the Mainland in Queens. Event Planning: Parent Executive Board Members and Parent SLT Members will plan this event: find venue, select date/time, determine cost, etc and share information with Parent Coordinator and the rest of the SLT team. Flyers and pupilpath blasts (in parent home languages) will be sent to parents and caregivers to advertise this event. Students will receive a dress down day pass if their parent/caregiver attends the event as an attendance incentive. Attendees will be asked to complete a survey google form to provide the team with feedback on the event in order to enhance future events. Event # 3: Event Planning will begin in October 2018. Event will take place in February 2019. Select members from Executive Board Team, select members from School Leadership Team and Parent Coordinator 4 Students, Parents and Caregivers Event Planning will begin in October Select members from Executive Board Team, select members from  A family fun night will be planned at a Cyclone's Game in June of 2019. This event will take place in Brooklyn. Event Planning: Select School leadership team members and parent coordinator will plan this event: communicate with group sales at The Brooklyn Cyclones stadium, select date, determine price, coordinate with chorus teachers, etc. This information will be shared with the Cabinet Team. Chorus teachers will recruit students to attend the event and to sing the National Anthem on the field at the start of the game. Flyers and pupilpath emails to parents (in parent home languages) will be sent to parents, caregivers and students to advertise this event. Incentives, such as dress down day passes will be distributed to students who attend the event. Attendees will be asked to complete a survey google form to provide the team with feedback on the event in order to enhance future events. The School Leadership Team and Parent Coordinator will monitor the attendance of the three enrichment events to promote strong family and community ties, as well as feedback from the Google form surveys in order to enhance future events, find new events of interest to plan and increase attendance rates. The grades who have the highest attendance rates will be celebrated and recognized. Event attendees will also receive thank you letters for engaging in the school's events and initiatives to enhance the Strong Family Community Ties. 2018. Event will take place in June 2019. School Leadership Team, Chorus Teachers and Parent Coordinator Parents and caregivers Three times per year School Leadership Team, Technician, Deans, Student Government, and Parent Coordinator In June, the School Leadership Team will send out a Google form survey to the entire Scholars' Academy community to identify new events of interest to plan for the 2019-2020 school-year. Students, Parents and Caregivers June 2019 School Leadership Team, Technician, Deans, Student Government, and Parent Coordinator 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The following organizations (in addition to others not listed) are affiliated with Scholars' Academy for the purpose of promoting community engagement via events, celebrations, and community service opportunities. These organizations are not directly involved in this specific CEP Goal. JDRF (Lil' North Pole)  Millennium Development  New York Families for Autistic Children (NYFAC)   Rockaway Waterfront Alliance  Belle Harbor Property Owners Association  Community Board 14  Broadridge Financial Solutions   Graybeards  American Legion St. Francis College Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Association Leadership and Funding Supports Technician Parent Coordinators School Leadership Team Grade Leaders Teachers Chorus Administration Meeting Times Programming Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The School Leadership Team and Parent Coordinator will monitor the attendance of the three enrichment events to promote strong family and community ties in: 1. September 2018 2. February 2019 3. June 2019 Attendees will be asked to complete a survey google form to provide the team with feedback on each event in order to enhance future events. In June, the School Leadership Team will send out a Google form survey to the entire Scholars' Academy community to identify new events of interest to plan for the 2019-2020 school-year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress toward meeting this goal will be tracked by: School Leadership Team   Executive Board  Cabinet Team  Parent Coordinator  Student Government The above listed individuals and teams will analyze the data three times: 1. September 2018 2. February 2019 3. June 2019 We intend to see the average parent attendance rate across all three events to exceed 5% of the overall parent population. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are selected for academic intervention and acceleration services in English Language Arts based on multiple forms of data, such as the universal screenerI-ready diagnostic, state assessment performance/ progress, writing assessments, reading assessments, benchmark exams, report card grades and individualized education plans. 400 Students :  Grades 6-8 -Common Core ELA  Running Records  Reading Intervention  Wilson  Orton Gillingham Grade 9/10 -  Common Core Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) English Language Arts intervention and acceleration support classes include large group, small group and one-to-one instruction. English Language Arts intervention and acceleration support classes may take place before school, after school, during the school day and/or on Saturdays. These programs consist of subject team and teacher created skill based lessons, assignments and activities designed to provide individualized instruction in areas designated to show a need/weakness. The following are resources and materials that are used during AIS & AAT programs: I-Ready online program, NYS CCLS Ready books, NEWSELA, Castle Learning, Mobymax, Learning Ally, F& P assessments, Goalbook, past ELA state exams, Regents exams, AP exams, rubrics, predictive exams, diagnostic exams, online courses, essay writing, reading fictional selections, non fiction text, newspapers, historical fiction novels, and utilizing the Internet. 8 English Mathematics intervention and acceleration support classes include large group, small group and one-to-one instruction. Mathematics intervention and acceleration support classes may take place before school, after school, during the school day and/or on Saturdays. Mathematics  Reading Grades 11-12 -  AP English /SAT Students are selected for academic intervention and acceleration services in Mathematics based on multiple forms of data, such as state assessment performance/progress, formative assessments, benchmark exams, report card grades and individualized education plans. 400 Students : Grades 6-7  Common Core Math  Basic Math Skills Grades 8 These programs consist of teacher created lessons, assignments and activities designed to provide individualized instruction in areas designated to show a need/weakness. The following are resources and materials that are used during AIS programs: NYS CCLS Ready books, Castle Learning, MobyMax, past Math state exams, Regents exams, AP exams, rubrics, predictive exams, diagnostic exams, online courses and utilizing the Internet.  Common Core Algebra Grade 9 & 10 –  Geometry  Algebra  Algebra II Grades 11-12 -  Geometry  Algebra  AlgebraII 9  Science Social Studies  AP Math Classes  College Math Classes Students are selected for academic intervention and acceleration services in Science based on multiple forms of data, such as state assessment performance, formative assessments, labs, benchmark exams, report card grades and individualized education plans. 250 Students:  Grade 7 Science Living Environment,   Physics  Earth Science,  Chemistry  AP Physics 1 & C,  AP Chemistry  AP Biology Students are selected for academic intervention and acceleration services in Social Studies based on multiple forms of data, such as state assessment performance, writing assessments, benchmark exams, report card grades and individualized education plans. These programs consist of teacher created lessons, assignments and activities designed to provide individualized instruction in areas designated to show a need/weakness. The following are resources and materials that are used during AIS programs: U Texas, Castle Learning, Regents exams, AP exams, rubrics, InquiryBased Labs, predictive exams, diagnostic exams, and Regents review books, mini labs, virtual labs, online courses and the Internet. These programs consist of teacher created lessons, assignments and activities designed to provide individualized instruction in areas designated to show a need/weakness. Based upon data analysis and needs assessments, teachers recommend students for these small group AIS Science intervention and acceleration support classes include large group, small group and one-to-one instruction. Science intervention and acceleration support classes may take place before school, after school, during the school day and/or on Saturdays. Social Studies intervention and acceleration support classes include large group, small group and one-to-one instruction. Social Studies intervention and acceleration support classes may take place before school, after school, during the school day and/or on Saturdays. 0  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 180 Students: Grade 9 - US History Grade 10/11 - Global History Grades 9-12 - AP US History, AP Psychology, AP World History Students are selected for counseling, at risk or health services based on individualized education plans student referrals, parent referrals and/or teacher referrals. Students are discussed at learning support team meetings and recommendations for counseling are made. Students complete three surveys a year regarding their social, emotional and academic well being and information from that survey is used to great student support groups. Students also meet with their counselor regarding: community service, honor society, high school applications and admissions, college applications and admissions, classes. The following are resources and materials that are used during AIS programs: Regents exams, Castle Learning, AP exams, rubrics, predictive exams, diagnostic exams, online courses, essay writing, reading fictional selections, non fiction text, newspapers, primary source documents, historical speeches, historical fiction novels and utilizing the Internet. Guidance supports are provided to students to provide counseling about topics such as: organizational skills, work quality, study skills, homework completion, class performance, conflict mediation, community service, parental involvement, peer pressure, parent divorce/separation, bereavement, anger management, STH, how to interact in a positive setting, high school selection process, college readiness, responsiveservices and crisis management Class workshops are also facilitated to address topics such as anger management, positive social interaction, peer One-to-one, small group, class or grade sessions and/or assemblies Counseling and health support services classes may take place before school, after school, during the school day and/or on Saturdays. 1  transition, orientation, etc. Gr 6 - 198 Gr 7 - 231 Gr 8 - 231 Gr 9 - 165 Gr 10- 195 Gr 11 - 165 Gr 12 - 165 pressure, being a positive role model and saying no to drugs and alcohol. Guidance Counselors also services students with IEPsfor mandated counseling. Students also receive services from the school nurse and paraprofessionals with regards to: diabetes, asthma conditions, nebulizer treatment, severe allergies, migraines, use of crutches, etc. Speech, occupational therapy, physical therapy, adaptive physical education, and hearing services are also provided on a one to one or small group basis depending on students’ individualized education plans. 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). According to ATS Report RADR, 10 students in total are considered in temporary housing. Of these 10 students, 6 students are living in "Doubled-Up" arrangements, 1 student is living in a 3  shelter with his family in the Bronx, and 3 students are in "Other Temporary Living Situations." 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. An STH Guidance Counselor point person provides a minimum of monthly counseling check ins for all students with STH status to assess any social-emotional needs, clothing needs, learning material needs, or other supports that would benefit the students. The STHGC then coordinates such supports with the Family Worker, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Team, Deans, Classroom Teachers, Administration, and Parents as needed. Materials, clothing, external organizational support, etc. are provided based upon the STHGC's assessment and direct interaction with the students. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $7,058 in STH Funding for Non-Title I Schools will generate guidance support of STH students. Parent Association Funding/Support will be accessed as needed for additional material supports for students. 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Not Applicable 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Not Applicable Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Not Applicable 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 6  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Scholars’ Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Scholars’ Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents and caregivers work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, use of technology, attendance, punctuality, social emotional well being ● providing parents and caregivers with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents and caregivers can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress ● providing assistance to parents and caregivers in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents and caregivers to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community 8  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents and caregivers in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents and caregivers in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents and caregivers who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will assist with parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents and caregivers to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents and caregivers of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 9  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting events to strengthen Strong Family Community Ties; (see CEP Goal 5) monthly breakfasts, carnival, Boardwalkathon, career fair, educational workshops, STEM event, Reading night, college workshops, high school workshops, technology workshops, etc ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become school volunteers; ● providing written, electronic and/or verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school website, newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Scholars’ Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 0  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each Term during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; (the Skedula/Pupipath online communication system provides translation services available to parents in their home language) ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; using Skedula/Pupilpath ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; using Skedula/Pupilpath ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; monthly breakfasts, carnival, Boardwalkathon, career fair, educational workshops, STEM event, Reading night, college workshops, high school workshops, technology workshops, Curriculum Overview, and 3 specific community events in the geographic areas served by Scholars' Academy (See CEP Goal 5) etc. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 1  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs. ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name Scholars' Academy Borough Queens School Number 323 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Brian O'Connell Coach Kayla Montalvo ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Judith Mainhart Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Earle - Humanities Related-Service Provider Julie Molino Superintendent Mary Barton Assistant Principal Dannielle Colleran Coach School Counselor Rosa Lagombra Parent Irene Dougherty Parent Coordinator Krissy Supple Field Support Center Staff Member Pierre Galvez Other (Name and Title) Gianfranco Moretta, Counselor C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1376 Total number of ELLs 1 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 0.07% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The school uses teacher-created assessments aligned to the skills found on the NYSESLAT to track the progress of ELL students. Teachers and administrators analyze the data from the assessments as well as the assessment feature in NEWSELA, benchmarks, running records, NY Ready benchmark assessments, and ongoing teacher analysis to track student progress. After the data is collected, the information is used to drive instruction and students are grouped accordingly. Resources are adjusted to ensure students have multiple entry points. The data determines additional supports that may be needed regarding language acquisition and vocabulary acquisition. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 5  The ENL teacher is programmed to meet with ELL/former ELL students individually to assess student ability. The ENL teacher and core teachers share lessons through use of google docs in order for the ENL teacher to create appropriate resources to support the student. The data team tracks progress of the ELL subgroup in all content areas and shares this information with the core teachers and the ENL teacher. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use several data points to evaluate the success of our program. The teacher teams analyze the data of ELL students on their CCLS writing pieces, benchmark exams, and in-class assessments to ensure ELL students are on track to succeed on the NYS ELA exam and Regents level exams. Teachers use Moby Max as a universal-screener to identify areas of weaknesses in the content areas of reading and math. The ENL teacher, reading teacher or classroom teacher conduct running records using Fountas and Pinnell, the data from this assessment is used to determine students Lexile level, comprehension skills, fluency, and vocabulary acquisition. Data is analyzed at various points throughout the year to assess students progress. Teachers analyze the data from the 4 benchmark exams, 6 formal writing pieces, a beginning, middle, and end year MOBY Max assessment, and a beginning, middle, and end of the year running record. The data is used to assess progress and make necessary adjustments to instruction to strategically support the students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Student data is analyzed by the ENL teacher, reading teacher, and classroom teachers. Each teacher uses that data to develop specially designed instruction to best support the needs of the students. Data drives student grouping, student task materials, student support materials, and materials needed to extend learning. Students receive intervention services by the ENL teacher based on the required minutes (90 minutes or 180 minutes based on student status). The reading teacher is programmed to work with students in small groups. Students attend scheduled AAT periods with content area teachers. Teachers utilize visuals, audio recordings, screen casts, chunked text, graphic organizers, and modified task sheets to support students understanding of the language and materials. There is a peer tutoring program that takes place after-school to support identified students with understanding content material or to assist with homework completion. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT reveals that we have one students that is eligible to receive 90 minutes of ELL instruction and one student that is eligible to receive 180 minutes of ELL instruction. We program the ENL teacher to push into the humanities classroom to support the students throughout the school year. The ENL teacher is assigned two or four 45 minute sessions to support the students in the content area. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The LAP team members (Julie Molino and Dannielle Colleran) run the RLAT report multiple times throughout the school year to identify if there are any ELL students. Once an ELL student is identified the student is programmed for appropriate services. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 6  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Freestanding ENL program is structured to support students based on their individual needs. Students either receive 90 minutes or 180 minutes of instruction in a content area class. The ENL teacher pushes into the students English, science or math class. Students that require the services are placed in the same class on their respective grade level. Classes are heterogeneous. Students are grouped in the class in either focus or power groups based on the teacher task. The class travels as a group to the various courses throughout the day. The ENL teacher provides individual instruction and support to the ENL students in the core content area class. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A - Enrollment data indicates current students do not fit this criteria c. DL program. If applicable. N/A - Enrollment data indicates current students do not fit this criteria 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The LAP Team works closely to ensure that student instructional programs comply with NYSED-CR Part 154 mandates and regulations including parent involvement procedures, course work, instruction and teacher professional development. Students are identified and the LAP Team analyzes the data to determine which core classes the ELL teacher should support. Necessary program adjustments are made to ensure students receive the mandated instructional minutes. The LAP team is designed to coordinate an academic plan to support and enhance all services for ELL students. The pupil accounting secretary intake team member, guidance counselor, ELL teacher and AP will serve as points of contact between home and school. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All instructional materials are aligned to the Common Core standards Core content is delivered to students using a variety of resources. Teachers follow a balanced instructional approach in which students receive direct instruction through teacher modeling or screencasts, students work in triad groups to complete group tasks and engage in group discussions, students also work individually on NYS Next Generation Learning Standards-based tasks to demonstrate their understanding of the content. The ENL teacher provides instructional support as needed to students based on student need. The students use chromebooks and/or iPads to access resources such as Learning Ally, NEWSELA, Castle Learning, Moby Max, visuals, dictation APPs, voice to text features, and the classroom library to support English language instruction. Modifications are made to core materials to ensure the student has an entry point. The ELL teacher reinforces English language by reading aloud problems, providing visuals as needed, and reinforcing language in discussions. The teacher utilizes visual aids, video recordings and flashcards in the science and math classrooms to reinforce language and concepts. In the humanities classroom, the teacher uses various video recordings, video/movie clips, Learning Ally, and screencasts to reinforce comprehension, language, and processing skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Ms. Mainhart, ELL teacher, monitors student progress throughout the year and questions the students on their preferred language for instructional resources and support. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 7  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Within the classroom, the ELL and content teacher plan for all levels, student tasks and materials are differentiated to support students. Students who fall into the categories of SIFE, newcomer, developing, or long term would receive necessary services to support their development. Each group receives the required hours of instruction in the content area from the ELL teacher and the content teacher. The ELL teacher pushes into core content classes and works closely with the content teacher to create instructional materials to support student understanding. SIFE students are provided with support from the ELL teacher, core content teacher, reading teacher and the special education teacher. The teachers collaborate using google docs to create scaffolds so the students have an entry point to the material. Text and tasks are recorded for students to listen to the material. Newcomers and developing students receive 360 minutes of instruction per week from the ELL teacher in core content area classes. Long Term ELLs and Former ELLs receive instruction by the ELL teacher in a content area class for 90 minutes per week. The reading teacher supports ELL students in the area of reading comprehension during small group AAT instruction. ELL students receive testing modifications. Students receive differentiated materials that include visuals, audio recordings and chunked text. Differentiated resources are available to students through google classroom, NEWSELA, Moby Max, Ten Marks, teacher websites, Khan Academy, and Duolingo. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers utilize a variety of instructional strategies to support ELL-SWDs that provide students with access to academic content areas while accelerating English language development. Supports include scaffolding instruction, graphic organizers, manipulatives, leveled task sheets, iPads, videos, laptops, ten marks, Castle Learning, Learning Ally, NEWSELA, paired passages, flexibility in deadlines, Moby Max, peer tutoring, small group extra help, and AAT. Teachers utilize various instructional approaches such as team teaching, parallel teaching, station teaching, alternative teaching, one teach-one observe, alternative teaching, and one teach-one assist to best support the material being covered in the most strategic manner to support student learning. The ELL teacher works closely with the special education teacher to develop appropriate resources to best support the student. Teachers utilize grade level Next Generation NYS Learning Standards and the NYS Scope sequence to drive their curriculum. ELL-SWD students participate in various book clubs to enhance their reading comprehension skills, students are signed into Learning Ally for audio versions of the novels. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school uses a variety of resources such as Learning Ally, Castle Learning, NEWSELA, scaffolding questions, teacher curriculum sites, to allow the student to have access and entry points to the curriculum. IEPs of ELL students are analyzed and implemented by the ELL teacher, special education, and core class teachers. All teachers work together to support the student and meet their IEP goals. IEP students are programmed based on the program recommendations in their IEPs. ELL teachers team teach with core teachers to support the students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention programs for ELLS in ELA, math and science would consist of an integrated ELL program with targeted support from Ms. Mainhart, licensed ELL teacher. Ms. Mainhart would work closely with the humanities, math and science teachers to ensure that appropriate supports are in place for the identified students. Ms. Mainhart would keep an ongoing log of interactions with students to track the supports that are working best for them. Ms. Mainhart would differentiate supports through scaffolding questions, chunking texts, individual reading conferencing, repetition of language, supporting student discussions, writing conferences, visual representations, and various graphic organizers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 8  For the upcoming school year, improvements to enhance the program will include purchasing NEWSELA Pro to provide students with various leveled text in order to support the various Lexile levels of ELL students. The program will be enhanced by providing targeted professional development to the ELL teacher. The school will purchase Moby Max to be used as the universal screening tool to track student achievement throughout the school year. The newly hired IEP Reading Teacher will collaborate with the ELL teacher to work with ELL students to improve reading comprehension and language acquisition skills. The ELL teacher will share her learning from outside professional learning experiences at the Borough Field Support Center with content area teachers during in-house sharing symposiums and professional learning sessions. This will allow for content area teachers to learn about various supports for the ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students have equal access to all school programs throughout the year. Students receive Pupilpath messages in the preferred language to make parents and students aware of the various programs in the school. Parents of ELLs are notified of after-school programs such as Millennium Development, peer tutoring, sports clubs, and AAT classes. Notification in the preferred language and English will take place through emails, paper notices sent home, and daily morning messages that are on the school's website. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELL students have one to one iPads in the middle school classrooms and one to one macbook pros in the high school classrooms. ELL students have access to the online curriculum for all courses. Students are provided with various supports such as leveled text, scaffolding questions, various visuals, graphic organizers, peer tutors, and NEWSELA. Students have access to the computer lab during morning arrival, lunch, and after school. If needed, we allow students to sign out technology for home use. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? N/A Current enrollment data indicates students do not fit this criteria. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Support, services, and resources that are provided to ELLs match their age and grade level. The school develops age appropriate curriculum based on the Common Core Standards and the Scope and Sequence. Teachers utilize resources that are within the recommended lexile level for the respective grade span. Ms. Mainhart collects data from various sources to identify student weaknesses and provides necessary supports that are age and grade level appropriate. Often these supports include graphic organizers, visual representations, guided questions, text summaries, and repetition of language. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELL students have one to one iPads or chromebooks in the middle school classrooms and one to one macbook pros or chromebooks in the high school classrooms. ELL students have access to the online curriculum for all courses. Students are provided with various supports such as leveled text, scaffolding questions, various visuals, graphic organizers, peer tutors, and NEWSELA. Students have access to the computer lab during morning arrival, lunch, and after school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities to assist the newly enrolled ELL students include a student/parent orientation. Parents and students are invited by the homeroom teacher and Ms. Mainhart to attend Curriculum Overview Night. Parents and students receive resources in their preferred language if necessary. Librarian, Ms. Gerasoulis, invites students to attend lunch time open access and gives them a tour of the library and data bases. Ms. Camarinos and Ms. Gerasoulis invite students to attend the Reading Celebration Night that takes place every fall. Ms. Supple, the parent coordinator, invites parents to attend meetings throughout the school 9  year. Ms. Mainhart, Mr. Milano, and Ms. Camarinos have parent workshops that are geared towards providing supports for English Language Learners. The School's technician, Mr. Davila, collaborates with the parent coordinator to conduct small group parent workshops on how to leverage technology to support student achievement. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students are offered Spanish as an elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Current enrollment data indicates that students do not fit this criteria. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for ELL personnel includes sessions in which teachers engage in a lesson study process (teachers review lesson plans, provide feedback and suggestions, observe the lesson, and debrief). Subject team meetings take place wherein teachers analyze and modify student tasks, lesson plans, and unit plans to ensure there are multiple entry points. In addition, teachers and other staff attend outside professional learning workshops. ELL personnel attend monthly workshops through the Borough Field Support Center. They attend webinars that enhance their toolbox of resources to support ELL students. ELL teachers attend professional development throughout the year. ELL teachers attend sessions through the Field Support Center (FSC). ELL teachers engage in professional learning through the lesson study cycle that has a focus on providing ELL students with appropriate supports to enhance learning using the Next Generation NYS Standards. ELL teachers share their learned skills during outside trainings in subject team meetings, lesson study sessions, grade meetings, and through two teacher sharing symposiums of best practices. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Staff members are informed of student ELL status. Grade level teachers meet weekly to discuss identified students and are provided with a list of instructional strategies of ways to appropriately support the students. The guidance counselor attends the grade level meetings to ensure that ELL students transition seamlessly into the school. Teachers determine whether or not students should be assigned a learning buddy to assist in the transition. A professional learning calendar is created by the professional learning team. The calendar is created to meet the needs of all instructional staff including ELL teachers. The professional learning calendar includes sessions that are dedicated to providing teachers with instructional strategies to support ELL students. This training takes place during a six week cycle. The ELL teachers receive additional professional training through webinars and workshops from the Borough Field Support Center. They attend workshops offered through the DOE. The hours for professional learning are tracked through sign-in sheets and Google Forms. 0  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Individual parent meetings of ELL students take place at the beginning of the school year. The grade specific guidance counselor coordinates the meeting with the parent and the ELL teacher. The guidance counselor and the ELL teacher follow a very specific agenda in which they review the ELL brochure, watch the parent video, review the programs available at the school, and discuss the goals the school has for the students and the parent shares the goals they have for the student. The interpretation unit is utilized if necessary so that they parent is communicated with in their home language. All resources and materials are provided in the parents home language. The parent, guidance counselor and ELL teacher share email addresses or phone numbers for future contact. The ELL teacher communicates with the parent on a bi-weekly schedule to inform the parent of student progress. Parent receives student grades through Pupilpath which is a system that provides families with current student progress in all of their classes. The parent is invited up for a mid-year meeting to discuss the students progress and new goals are developed based on the students progress in language development. The interpretation services are utilized so parent is communicated with in their home language. The ELL teacher, grade level guidance counselor, core content teacher and student attends the mid-year meeting. A final of the year meeting is scheduled with ELL teacher, guidance counselor and student to discuss progress from the school year and develop summer goals and goals for the following year. Throughout the year the parent will have access to students grades through the Pupilpath system. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are viewed as critical stakeholders in students' academic achievement and as a result considerable efforts are made in order to engage them with knowledge about school events, activities and important information as well as strategies to assist their child with homework. Every effort is made to communicate in the parent's native language. Our goal is to encourage families to be actively involved in the learning community of our school. ELL families are invited to attend individual parent meetings with the ELL teacher and grade level guidance counselor. The parent coordinators provide information to ELL families regarding all Borough and Citywide ELL workshops using the Pupilpath system in which notices are sent home in the families preferred language. ELL parents are invited to attend parent workshops, visit classrooms, and meet teachers throughout the school year. ELL parents are invited to attend curriculum overview night, ELL parent workshops, Reading Celebration Night, transcript workshops, college nights, school performances, NYS ELA & Math Exam workshops, cyber-safety workshops, college and career fairs, technology parent workshops, parent meet and greet evenings, and tips for supporting your child workshops. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Quality Review results conveyed that the school is "Well Developed," indicating efficacy with regard to this matter. Additional parent outreach takes place during parent orientations, open houses, translated monthly event calendars, and letter translations. Numerous staff members serve as interpreters. In addition, the admissions director and attendance coordinator are the school's official Spanish/English interpreters. Several languages spoken fluently by our staff are: Spanish, Mandarin, Nigerian, French, Arabic, German, Russian, Italian, Filipino/Tagalog, and American Sign Language. 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Brian O'Connell, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Scholars' Academy School DBN: 27Q323 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Brian O'Connell Title Principal Dannielle Colleran Assistant Principal Kristine Supple Parent Coordinator Judith Mainhart ENL/Bilingual Teacher Irene Dougherty Parent Michelle Earle, ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jeannine Giove, CB Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Henck, Math Coach Kalya Montalvo, Humanities Coach Rosa Lagombra School Counselor Mary Barton Pierre Galvez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 6/28/18 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q323 School Name: Scholars' Academy Superintendent: Mary Barton The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Dannielle Kristine Julie Colleran Supple Molino Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Pupil Accounting Secretary Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Identification Surveys, Emergency Information Cards, and RHLA reports on ATS are the reports used to assess language preferences of all parents. We use this information rendered from these documents/reports to designate the appropriate language in which correspondence is conducted with parents. We generate this information into a spreadsheet in order for the school community to correspond with families in the preferred language. 4  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English ARABIC Bengali Chinese French Hindi Japanese Mandarin Pilipino Punjabi Polish DUTCH Gurma Russian Spanish Tamil Urdu Ukrainian Albanian Haitian Creole 1631 86.99 1618 86.29 2 57 25 2 3 1 0 1 17 12 1 1 17 99 2 2 0 1 1 0.11 3.04 1.33 0.11 0.16 0.05 0 0.05 0.91 0.64 0.05 0.05 0.91 5.28 0.11 0.11 0 0.05 0.05 5 57 23 2 3 2 3 1 17 13 1 1 19 101 4 2 1 1 1 0.27 3.04 1.23 0.11 0.16 0.11 0.16 0.05 0.91 0.69 0.05 0.05 1.01 5.39 0.21 0.11 0.05 0.05 0.05 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 5  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Use of DOE translation services or we will use the DOE vendor "The Big Word" for non-covered languages Use of Skedula translation procedures Principal's Monthly PA and SLT Report Use of DOE translation services Use of DOE translation services Parent Handbook September Parent teacher conference memos are sent home twice a year Principal's Monthly PA and SLT Report, Middle School Open House Information Fall - November Spring - march Monthly October December Middle school application invitations, interview letters and seat offers February April 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Overview Nigh September Reading Celebration Night October High school application workshops October/November Middle school open house and orientation October/November Parent Teacher Conferences November and March interpretation service(s)? Dual-language staff members are used to translate information to identified families, if necessary use of DOE translation phone services Dual-language staff members are used to translate information to identified families, if necessary use of DOE translation phone services Dual-language staff members are used to translate information to identified families, if necessary use of DOE translation phone services Dual-language staff members are used to translate information to identified families, if necessary use of DOE translation phone services Dual-language staff members are used to translate information to identified families, if necessary use of DOE translation phone services 6  Monthly PA meetings Monthly College application workshops October, January and April STEM Family Night March Dual-language staff members are used to translate information to identified families, if necessary use of DOE translation phone services Dual-language staff members are used to translate information to identified families, if necessary use of DOE translation phone services Dual-language staff members are used to translate information to identified families, if necessary use of DOE translation phone services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school communicates with families using the pupil path email message system in case of emergencies. The messages are translated into the parents preferred language. We have staff members that speak the following languages: Hindi, Urdu, Punjabi, Bengali, Portuguese, French, Italian, and Spanish. These staff members communicate with identified families in case of emergency. The school uses the Over-the-Phone Interpretation Services for parent and staff communication. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff are trained in September regarding the various ways to communicate with parents in their preferred language. Staff members receive through email, in the faculty handbook and verbally during staff training the information for the DOE translation services unit. Staff members are trained to ensure pupilpath messages are translated, they are made aware of staff members that speak various languages. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school places signs in several prominent places in the school informing parents of the translation services available to them, as well as a welcome poster, parent guide, and language ID guide at the safety desks. Parent 7  coordinators send parents information via pupilpath informing them of pertinent information and meetings throughout the year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school conducts surveys via Google Forms to ensure that parent needs are met. In addition, school staff engages parents at face to face SLT meetings and Parent Association meetings. 8 
