 28Q350 School Name: JAMAICA GATEWAY TO THE SCIENCES Principal: CAREN BIRCHWOOD TAYLO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information JAMAICA GATEWAY TO THE SCIENCES 28Q350 342800011350 9-12 School Number (DBN): 167-01 GOTHIC DRIVE, JAMAICA, NY 11432 718-480-2689 Phone Number: CARENBIRCHWOOD-TAYLOR 718-480-2697 Fax: cbirchw@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: CAREN BIRCHWOOD-TAYLOR Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: MICHAEL PIZZO MARVIN ALLEN MATTHEW LAWLOR SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): MARVIN ALLEN MARIA ANIMA SOPULUCHUKWUMADUKA CBO Representative: N/A Geographical District: 28 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information JUAN MENDEZ Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place JMendez@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-281-7696 Phone Number: 718-281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   QUEENS SOUTH Marlene Wliks FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 82-01 RockawayBlvd MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) CAREN BIRCHWOOD-TAYLOR MATTHEW LAWLOR Marvin Allen NA MARVIN ALLEN MARIA ANIMA SopuluchukwuMaduka N/A Audrey Chung MeriDimas Eunice Ledgister *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ teacher Member/ teacher Member/ parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Frankie Lebron CRYSTAL DOWDY-GILYARD Member/ parent Member/ parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The school's mission is to encourage the high achievement of, and provide advanced preparation for, students interested in science and math, especially those historically underrepresented in college. Students will graduate academically, socially, and emotionally prepared for rigorous college coursework and the pursuit of health and science related careers.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences has 498 students representing a diverse demographic. The population consists of 42% Asian/ Pacific Islander, 40% Blacks/African-American, 15% Hispanic, and 3% White. Of the school population, 14% are English Language Learners (ELLS) and 14% of students have an IEP. In addition, approximately 70 % of students receive free lunch. Jamaica Gateway's instructional program is grounded in the use of the D.O.K (depth of knowledge). It emphasizes students as contributors to the learning experience, where every student is expected to create new knowledge through interaction with resources and through peer discussions. Collaboration occurs among all constituents of the school community to support the learners in achieving their goals. For example, internships are offered where students are given opportunities for real-world application of their learning, as well as developing their leadership and social skills. Student to student support occurs during classroom instruction, in peer-tutoring and in study group sessions. Advisory classes and assemblies are carefully designed to support students' socio-emotional growth. College Prep classes ensure that every graduate of Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences will attain skills, knowledge and competencies that will prepare them to serve as positive contributors to their chosen academic, professional, and local communities. In addition, Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences is an AP for All school where students are provided with at present seven AP course selections on site and on/off-site college level courses through the College Now Program at CUNY. Extracurricular activities provide avenues for students to be involved in the life of the school. They also serve as strong motivators for students to attend regularly and to perform well in their classes. Our students have participated in Mock trial, Model UN, Robotics, and music band competitions. They have also performed in campus wide talent shows and musicals and in the school's Multicultural Show . They are involved in a variety of athletic teams such as baseball, basketball, swimming, track, tennis, volleyball, wrestling, cricket, Lacrosse, and football. The school works with several partners to promote both staff and student development. The English department is supported with coaches in rewriting and refining curricula to be aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards. Another educational consultant works with the guidance department to enhance the strategies to engage students and families. Ramapo for Children and ENACT trained teachers on identifying and supporting students with behavioral challenges. Teaching Matters and Lincoln Center Education trained the ENL teacher and all teachers in several research-based strategies including theater to promote literacy for students. Seniors are now for the sixth year assisted in the college application process by an intern from the NYUCAC (New York University College Advising Corp) hence maximizing their college choice leading to admissions to prestigious colleges such as Vassar, Vanderbilt, Notre Dame, Cornell, NYU, SUNY Binghamton, Union College and with several scholarships for example, UFT, Posse, Questbridge, and CUNY Honors. Juniors boosted their SAT scores with tutorials from staff. The school boasts several Posse scholarship candidates this year. Our special populations are students with disabilities and English Language Learners who often struggle with making adequate academic progress. It was found that many of them needed to strengthen their literacy. A special class was created to support their needs using the Achieve 3000 reading program, Albert Software- an online assessment program spanning all subject areas from basic classes to AP courses. In addition, Ms. Chung, one of our Science teachers spearheads the ACE program to assist students with IEPs, ENL status, at risk students, and those in need of 0  enrichment with Living Environment, Earth Science, Algebra, and Geometry subject area, with a focus on understanding concepts, literacy, and on general organization. Most of them passed the June 2018 Regents exam with scores that would lead to at least a local diploma. The challenge for the school is to engage all families more in these types of supportive efforts. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Academically at risk students are frequently identified with continuous feedback from teachers who meet within departments at least three times per week during Common Planning Time. Subsequently students are scheduled for teacher tutoring and peer-tutoring sessions; after school literacy classes such as ACE Club using ACHIEVE 3000; and mandatory meetings with the guidance counselor to chart a course for student progress. Students with IEPs are served in ICT (Integrated Co-teaching) classes in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies as well as in Resource room. Our high performers in Math and Science are selected to attend enrichment programs and opportunities such as the Hofstra Medical Pipeline, Posse Program and the SEO program; and to take College Now and AP classes. The school now offers 7 AP courses: English Literature and Composition, Calculus, Computer Science, Psychology, US History, Statistics, Biology. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the 2017-18 school survey, indicates that we are above average in all six areas of the Frame work, which are defined as Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership and Trust, with the highest positive difference in Strong Family-Community Ties (.49 to .39). In spite of the many areas of success, the school needs to improve on creating systems to revise and monitor structures for improvement. The focus this year will be on creating a cycle of action plans with a strong emphasis on writing to provide data-driven instruction in all departments with student progress as evidence of outcomes. The instructional focus will be on increasing the rigor and addressing the relevance of learning objectives in implemented lessons . The objective of these plans is to close the present graduation and the College Readiness gap. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q350 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 511 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 3 3 1 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 11 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 74.0% % Attendance Rate 69.3% % Reduced Lunch 11.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.9% 13.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.26 0% 32% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 88% 74% 82.8% 22.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YES No N/A 49 47 1 90.9% 5.3% 14.5% 36.4% 39.1% 8.8% 2 4% 4.6 N/A N/A 86% 86% 93.8% 26% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A YES NO NO N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The latest 2017-2018 NYC School Survey results indicate that students are not challenged in their classes through rigorous questions and assessments. Thus, there is a need for teachers to plan Rigorous tasks that require higher order thinking to be aligned with level 4 on the D.O.K chart as well as aligned with effective instruction as evidenced by at least a rating of effective on the instruction domain of Danielson (3b, 3c, 3d) including critical thinking that incorporate questioning and discussion techniques . The Science department need to modify its curricula to conform to the Next Generation Science Standards for curriculum and unit plans, while the Math department needs to engage students in evaluative practices of assessing their work for alternative methods of problem solving and to defend their answers through meaningful discussion and work products that include writing . The Humanities (ELA & Social Studies) need to collaborate to create interdisciplinary units that will be aligned with CCSS and to reflect the shifts of the Transitional Global Regents writing task. All tasks and assignments provided by teachers to students should incorporate use of the DOK chart and a revised Bloom’s Taxonomy in a RigorMeter chart of the highest level that will assist them in planning rigorous questions. Teachers use Common Planning Time to meet by department, 3 times a week, to examine data that would inform their instruction. Data examined by teacher teams range from NYC Performance Assessment baseline, Regents type questions and responses, Regents item analysis, Writing responses from students, projects, quizzes and classwork. Teachers examine student work using an ATLAS protocol in which they were trained by the ELA coach. Teachers meet as faculty two days in the summer before the beginning of the school year, twice a month, and also on Chancellor’s Conference Days to share best practices and research findings on how to best implement instructional strategies. Trainings range from technology integration in instruction by teachers to how to ENL/SWD strategies on how to scaffold instruction to make the information accessible for all learners without lowering the standards or rigor of the work. Every marking period, teachers use scholarship report data from STARS to devise measurable action plans and interventions for selected students which include student tracking and parental involvement. Strengths:  By August 2018, 86% of the senior class cohort graduated.  Regents passing in English as of June 2017 is 92%, 3   As of June 2018, passing rates in Chemistry (64%), Algebra (63%), US History (93%), Trigonometry (72%), and Physics (79%).  Almost all teachers have been designated as overall effective in their MOTP scores according to the data in Advance. Only two teachers were rated developing.  By June 2018, 77% of 9th grade students with IEPs passed the Living Environment Regents Exam with scores that render students eligible for graduation.  By June 2018, 93% of 11th grade students with IEPs passed the US History Regents exam with scores eligible for graduation.  Most ENL and students with IEPs were promoted in 2017-2018 as indicated in HSST/STARS.  Our 2018 graduates are attending several top colleges including: NYU, Cornell, Vassar, Notre Dame, Vanderbilt, Fordham University, and St. John's University, SUNY Albany, Buffalo, and Stonybrook, Hunter College, City College, and other CUNYs.  Most students with an IEP and former ENL seniors graduated this year. Area(s) in Need of Improvement: The June Regents exam results in Earth Science 50% though a 100% improvement from last year , did not meet the target goal of 60%. Therefore, this subject will continue to be the focus of Inquiry. In addition, as part of the college readiness initiative, increasing the present pass rate (63%) on the Common Core Regents Algebra exam is an area for school-wide focus for this school year, 2018-19. The focus will be to see an increase of more consistent effective teaching strategies that engage all students in learning and providing more opportunities for independent practice and assessments for students. In addition, teachers will more frequently use students' data to plan instructional modifications by making the content material challenging and rigorous for all students, while ensuring that it is accessible to all types of learners. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Algebra regents exam will increase by 12% (from the present 63%) and Earth Science by 10% (from present 50%) with the implementation of coherent instruction, clear and sequenced lessons to advance student learning, and planning for groups with differentiation and cognitively engaged students (1E). 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Observation and feedback from administrators Push-in to Common Planning Time every 2 weeks in math and science departments Geometry, Algebra and Earth Science teachers Biweekly, Sept 2018 Math coach and administration to June 2019 Administration Participation of math teachers in Adopt a school and rotational program Teachers will participate in their department's Inquiry Cycle and document the process Mandatory inter-visitation of teachers to classrooms of their colleagues in science and in math departments. Inter-visitation to other schools to observe effective practices Teachers will be trained to scaffold the concepts with focus on literacy and independent practice with students with special needs Teachers and sub-groups of students Weekly, Sept 2018-May 2019 Special education teachers must provide evidence of input into each lesson in Earth Science, Geometry, and Algebra each week. Special education teachers in Earth Science and Geometry. Field support liaison in math Teachers and administrators Math and science teachers at this school and in other schools Educational Consultants and administration Administrators 5  Weekly outreach to parents of students at-risk of failing as documented in ongoing logs in Skedula/PupilPath 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Weekly, September 2018-June 2019 Algebra, Geometry, and Earth Science teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. September 2018 - Curriculum Night - Teachers provide curriculum and instructional strategies overview to parents and provide methods of ongoing communication between teachers and parents throughout the school year. At PTA Meetings - Teachers provide parents with curricular overview of units of study either in person or via technology. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Hiring of educational consultant and per-session PD training for teachers. Coverage for classes of teachers participating in inter-visitation, if necessary Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2018 grades from Term 1 in STARS will be used along with final exam grades to determine if students are achieving mastery in Algebra, and Earth Science as evidenced by 75% Algebra students and 60% Earth Science students passing with a grade of 75 or above. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 6  Students' exam grades on department finals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school leader has established a positive supportive environment where student social and emotional developmental health and academic success is addressed regularly. A large guidance team relative to the student population (3 school counselors, 1 social worker, and 1 college advisor) appropriately address all students and their concerns. All teachers and staff are committed to helping students develop self-esteem, self-discipline, resilience, and help students to adopt appropriate accountability for misbehavior. According to the 2017-18 school survey, 91% of students feel safe in their classes and 86% of students feel safe in the hallways, locker rooms and cafeteria, which are all shared spaces with 3 other schools in the building. This data shows that the percentage of students who feel safe has increased from 84% to 91% in one year. We will continue with the initiatives put in place this school year to continue to promote a supportive environment. A positive school climate is maintained by a team approach at all levels – administrators, faculty, support staff, families, and students. Early interventions with students and parent conferences begin once an issue has been identified. Students can identify at least one adult in the building that they could turn to for support. In addition, guidance staff is organized where each person has specific groups of students for which they are responsible. Student needs are frequently assessed and used for conducting classroom guidance push-ins. However, we are striving to use more data driven practices for students who are at-risk. Socio-emotional and academic related data have been input in OORS, I-Log, STARS and in anecdotal emails and phone calls to parents, however, there has not been a centralized place for all constituents to share this information. As a result, a clear and comprehensive picture of students’ progress in all areas of school life is incomplete for some constituents. School’s strengths: ● Large, diverse staff ● Low student-to-counselor ratio 8  ● Rigorous Instruction ● Availability/willingness of staff to offer extra help (tutoring, clubs) to students ● Guidance/Teachers make parent outreach ● Large variety of extracurricular activities to engage students in positive behavior (clubs, sports, tutoring, internships, monitors for teachers) From the 2015-16 Quality Review report: High expectations are consistently communicated to teachers and students. High expectations are seen across constituents and according to the 2017-18 school survey, ????% of students reported that teachers expect them to work hard; ???% of students felt the teachers want students to become better thinkers, and not just memorize information. According to the results of the 2017-18 annual School Survey, 65% of students provided positive responses to the "Personal Attention and Support section. The initiative will continue with teachers will make personalized goals and receive early training at the beginning of the school year on how to best support students when they are upset by using research based best practices. The number should be higher given our learning environment and our structures for personalization and support. In order to address this, guidance systems which include attendance will be more closely monitored an revised throughout the year and earlier interventions including outside support will be implemented. A dean will continue to implement systems for the prevention and mediation of potential incidents as well as collaboration with guidance staff for at-risk students. We are also continuing the use of Skedula, which is an online reporting system to look at data (grades, attendance, transcripts, and patterns) and for communicating with parents. Additionally, parents have use of this system through a parent/student portal called PupilPath to also see and utilize data. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the number of students who feel supported by the school will increase by 5% from 65% to 70% on our annual School Survey 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Conflict Resolution and Mediation Classroom push-ins Individual crisis meetings Advisory Program (Overcoming Obstacles) PD for staff on socio-emotional related topics including de-escalation techniques and establishing positive relationships with students Students in conflict grades 9-12 Sept 2018 – June 2019 Pedagogue & Non-Pedagogue Guidance counselors, social worker, administration Sept-Oct Guidance staff 2018 ENACT Trainer from Ramapo for Children Nov 8 2018 PD for staff on Classroom Management Staff Guidance department meets with administration once a week to determine needs of students and to devise intervention plans Principal, AP and Dean along with support staff continue to provide continued and expanded monitoring of students in the cafeteria, hallways, staircases, conduct hall sweeps. Principal's Round-table Meeting with selected 9th & 10th graders from sub-groups for 4 sessions Guidance Students 9-12 Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Dean, AP, support staff, Guidance Grade 9-10 October 2018 Principal, Guidance staff March 2019 0  Open Door Policy for students to approach staff about issues Grades 9-12 Sept 2018– June 2019 Guidance/Support Staff/Administration/ Teachers Grades 9-12 Sept 2018– June 2019 Comprehensive Classroom Guidance Lessons. Guidance counselors create and implement engaging lessons on topics such as anger management, controlling impulses, discipline, and respect Grades 10-12 Sept 2018– June 2019 Administration / guidance staff Monthly from National Honor Society Student Members/Guidance/ Teachers 9th Grade November2018 Mayor's Office to Combat Domestic Violence Trainer October 2018 9th grade teachers, guidance staff, and administrators Late Sept 2018 Guidance/Faculty/ Once a month from September to June Community Agency/NYPD Special education and ENL teachers. Guidance staff, dean and administrators. Peer Mentoring/Mediation Interactive workshop for freshmen conducted by the Mayor's Office to Combat Domestic Violence - Healthy Relationship Training 9th grade mixer Gender specific assemblies addressing the needs of students on topic such as conflict resolution without violence, de-escalation, healthy/appropriate behaviors. Special education and English Language Learner team will address the existing and emerging socio-emotional needs of students with IEPs, English as a new language students (ENL), and other sub-groups at their monthly meetings and devise multiple levels of prevention and intervention measures. Grades 9 -12 Grades 9-12 Sept 2018 – June 2019 Guidance/Teachers/Administration/ Club Advisors/Coaches Promote extracurricular activities to encourage student connections. Currently, over 70% of students participate in an after- school activity. Will promote using flyers, assembly, classroom 1 presentations, school announcements, extra credit, accumulating service hours. Administration, Parent Coordinator, Guidance staff, ENACT Theater Company Representatives, 100 Schools Program Parents Sept 2018 – June 2019 PTA meetings will include workshops for parents on how to support the socio-emotional development of their children and the academic supports available at the school Parents are involved in decision-making through participation in the SLT. The parent coordinator distributes a monthly newsletter (including guidance reminders, announcements, and updates) at PTA and posted on the school’s website. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Implementation of ENACT Professional Development for parents throughout the school year that include the topics: Responsible use of social media; How to speak to your child about sensitive issues; How to assist your child in organizing themselves; Maintaining Healthy Relationships with your Peers; How to respond to incidents of bullying or other negative behaviors.. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for Guidance Counselors, Social worker, Club Advisors, Coaches for after-school activities Community Agencies Salaries of dean and AP NYPD Community Outreach Personnel Scheduling of auditorium in shared space Cost of Ramapo trainer Cost of ENACT actors Cost of translators for parent meetings 2  Materials for meetings and workshops Refreshments for selected workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant X SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. A check-in with guidance counselors each week and with teachers each marking period to identify students requiring early intervention. At end of January 2019, a school designed survey mirroring the annual School Survey will be sent to students in Skedula utilizing Survey Monkey, which should show that 70% positive responses received from students, that will show progress towards the goal of increasing by 5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Based survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers across the school use a common curriculum map template adopted by the school principal and includes essential questions, links to CCLS, and scaffolds with multiple entry points to meet the needs of SWD and ELLs. Math and ELA departments use EngageNY modules along with Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Big Ideas and Collections Curriculum respectively. Other departments use the NYS Content standards and the NYC Scope and Sequence. Teachers are provided with two versions of a preferred lesson plan template that include an area to describe modifications for special groups of students. Teachers design units that culminate in a project or a performance-based assessment such as writing an argumentative essay or researching and presenting a topic of study. Presentations include multiple modes of expression. Teachers refine curriculum based on needs of students as identified by Regents Item Analysis, MOSL data, analysis of students work during common planning time, data from report cards, feedback from classroom observers, exit tickets and checks for understanding during instruction. Strengths:  Department teams participate in monthly meetings that focus on the DDI cycle and implementing academic interventions for all students.  Teachers meet in department groups at least 3 times a week for Common Planning  The school's Inquiry Team meets once a month to focus on school data  All faculty attend staff development two days during the summer focusing on curriculum, instruction, and guidance supports for students  ELA teachers ar supported by a literacy coach  Math teachers  Each department is supported in the inquiry cycle process by an administrator  Teams of teachers present PD to colleagues during faculty meetings Area in Need of Improvement: Teachers meet during Common Planning Time to devise plans for students that are Common Core-aligned, but are not always consistently scaffolded for ENL students. This has been cited in the observation reports of many teachers. The need to be addressed this year relates to the academic performance of ENL students. According to the final grades of June 2018, the ENL population promotion rate is 23%. In addition, the NYSESLAT scores showed that none of 4  the students with the "expanding" literacy designation had acquired enough English language skills to reach the "commanding" level, a marked decrease over the previous year's outcomes. The May 2018 scores are anticipated to be released in August 2018. Therefore, we will be continuing the initiative of working with ENL to improve language proficiency. Our ENL teacher is inexperienced and will continue to need support. However, all teachers teach ENL students in their specific subject area. Therefore, the success of the ENL students depend on all staff assessing and planning for the individual needs of the ENL students, and then integrating the supports in a collaborative approach that is frequently monitored. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of ENL English proficiency growth will increase by 1 level for all students grades 9-12 as measured by the NYSESLAT scores. 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). PD on building positive relationships with students with special needs, so that they feel more supported, and staff training on how to teach study skills, organizational techniques to students. Ongoing LEAD Theater program training by the Vivian Beaumont Theater on Using Theater to promote student engagement All ENL teachers attend outside PD on offering Academic Intervention Services in various topics of literacy ENL teachers continue training on development of research base best practices to develop language proficiency. ENL teachers meet in CPT to create and to share strategies that support student learning Staff ENL Teachers Faculty Special education teachers Faculty PD Days: Sept 1 & 2 2018 Sept 2018-June 2019 Guidance staff, special education teachers, ENL teachers, social worker Administration, Vivian Beaumont Theater trainer Presenters from NYCDOE October 2018-January 2019 PD Days: August 30th and 31st 2018 BFSC offer training to both Special education and ENL teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Administration, special education 6  Push-in support of ENL teachers in instructional strategies regarding differentiation for ELL students. New ENL Teacher participate in workshops and other summer professional development Faculty teachers and ENL teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 LEAD program through Lincoln Theater ENL Teachers ENL Teacher Summer 2018 Special classes will be created for the lowest performing ELL students to utilize the literacy program Achieve 3000. Additionally, SPELL students will attend after-school Skillbuilders Club to develop basic skills and how to break bad study habits. Special focus will be placed on Algebra to increase the June 2019 results. ELL students Sept 2018- June 2019 PD on models of co-teaching and strategies for making instruction accessible to ELLs Faculty Special education teachers and ENL teachers meet in CPT to create to share strategies that support student learning Special education teachers and ENL teachers meet with co-teachers to plan effective instruction Ongoing outreach to ENL parents on academic and socio-emotional status of their children Workshop Presenters included from LEAD. Teachers, SPELL Teachers, Guidance, Borough Support Center personnel. Lincoln Education Center Special education teachers and ENL teachers Special education teachers and ENL teachers Special education teachers and ENL teachers ELL students Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 All teachers of integrated classes Parents of ELL students Sept 2018-June 2019 Special education and ENL teachers College counselor and guidance counselors 7 Afternoon and evening meetings for ENL parents to discuss the expectations for students and the supports offered at the school Individual post-secondary planning meetings for parents of ENL students. Skedula, a school management system, will be used to instantly provide snapshots to parents and students about their grades and to have reciprocal communication with parents Dedicated bilingual guidance counselor for ENL students Administration and faculty Sept 2018-June 2019 Staff, Administration, ELL Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Guidance Parents of ELL students, Staff, Students Parents of ENL students, Staff, Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In October 2018, all ENL parents will attend a parent workshop that will focus on the academic supports that the school provides to their students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -CPT is already scheduled for teachers -Presenters of PDs -Translators and food for parent meetings -Teachers will return to school 2 days before school begins to participate in PD. Teachers will be paid per session to attend. -LEAD program and Teaching Matters trainers funded . -Translators for meetings -Cost of Skedula and Achieve 3000 software -Teachers paid per session for after school academic programs, ACE Club, workshops, -Substitute teachers paid per diem when ENL teachers attend PD outside of the building; Teachers paid for coverage of ENL teachers when they attend at school PD during the school day. 8  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student progress will be monitored regularly using Skedula, a tracker system collected by ENL teacher and the use of a baseline and interim assessment collecting data on student performance using NYC Performance Assessment and then supported by the scholarship report data. ENL teachers must provide monthly report to administration on student progress. In January 2019, the final grades from Term 1 in STARS will be used to determine the percentage of ENL students that have met the credit requirement to be promoted to the next grade. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Albert Program and Achieve 3000 will be used by the ENL teacher will be used to assess progress, as well as the Scholarship Reports from HSST/STARS will be analyzed each marking period including at mid-year which is the end of the third marking period and the end of term 1. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. High expectations are clearly communicated through emails, weekly Principal’s Desk, monthly assembly address to student population, curriculum night, Title 1 meetings, PTA/SLT meeting once a month, parent letters distributed to students and daily announcement to students over the school’s intercom. The budget is allocated strategically in promoting students’ learning by offering after-school tutoring and on weekends in preparation for Regents exam, NYSESLAT, ACE club (serving primarily ENL & SWD students), PSAT/SAT and AP exams. Teachers are compensated for their time by getting paid per session for tutoring services provided to students on an extended basis. Also, the school purchases various types of technology that are made accessible for use in the classroom by both teachers and students that enhances instructional practice to promote the level of student engagement in learning. Every classroom has a working SMARTBOARD, chrome note books used in physics, laptops, Ti-83 or 84 calculators for each student to use in Math classrooms, i-pads for Language lab used primarily by ELA and Spanish department. In addition to this, professional outside agencies are used to provide services to both students and staff. For example, a Literacy coach, mentoring coach, NYU for college advisement to 11th and 12th grade students, Alley Pond Environmental Center, Stony Brook University laboratory experience for Chemistry and AP Biology students, Lincoln Center theater and Teaching Matters to work with ENL/SWD teachers, Justice Resource Center providing a lawyer to work with the law team, United Nations, Teachers for SAT prep, RAMAPO for CHILDREN, Six Flags for Physics day, ENACT workshop given to both parents and students. All of these professional services provided their expertise in working with teachers, students and parents within specialized areas to extend the learning experience by offering extended enrichment activities. At the beginning of every school year, teachers meet with administration for Initial Planning Conferences where each teacher sets at least two instructional goals for the year based on past performance as indicated in ADVANCE or off of past student data from STARS. The guidelines for evaluating teachers is based on the FRAMEWORK of TEACHING, “DANIELSON’s Rubric” and the findings are entered into ADVANCE. Throughout the school year teachers are observed formally and informally; based on their choice of observational options chosen at the beginning of the school year. In evaluating teachers, feedback are provided to them in a written report that includes strengths of practice, areas in need of improvement and actionable next steps. Scholarship data and feedback from observations conducted are used to inform future observational focus. Teachers receive differentiated professional development and targeted inter-visitations due to recommendations written in their observational report. Summaries of teachers overall instructional performance informs the development of the school-wide PD plan. Data for the school is collected through various on-line systems such as STARS, SKEDULA, QR, PPR, ADVANCE, ATS, School Survey, Regents item analyses, students’ work samples, meeting with guidance, and attendance teams, which are reviewed to identify areas in need of improvement and areas of strength. Data review is done on a continuous basis throughout the school year. The school Inquiry team meets once a month with one teacher representative from each department to review school-wide data of promotion in doubt list by subject area for credit matriculation and a summary of regents passing 0  score rate. Thereafter, the team devises an action plan that help students to develop targeted skill-set, which will impact a lower rate of promotion in doubt list due to by Marking period 3. The process involves looking at student work sample and re-focusing instructional practice to improve the development of target skill-sets required to improve learning. The results of this year’s promotion in doubt improved from 58 to 49 students who received PID letters; with less than 1% did not get promoted. School Strengths: Since its existence, the school has consistently achieved graduation rates of 83% and above. According to the SY 2016-17 Principal Performance Review, the school has earned a "well-developed" in the areas of curriculum, high expectations, and teacher teams. Priority Needs: However, though most of the students who start at the school in the 9th grade are successful, the school receives a significant number of "over the counter" students (up to 10% or more of total population) transferred to the school via several avenues including Public School Choice (PSC). Many of these transfer students are under-credited and off-track for graduation, some with a history of behavioral challenges. The school is then charged with ensuring these students graduate on time along with those students that entered the school in the 9th grade. This year, there is a more concerted effort to empower all stakeholders to provide further and earlier differentiated support and intervention for off-track seniors to ensure a higher June graduation rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Staff will meet weekly in common planning and department meetings to review and devise strategies to increase student engagement and achievement so that by June 2109 at least 88% of the senior cohort will graduate. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams Consultant and administrators will work with department teams to develop data-driven inquiry cycles leading to action plans to best support student learning. September 2018-June 2019 Administration and educational consultant Math teachers for CC Algebra and CC Geometry will participate in push-in and off-site PD offered by field support liaison Edison Teano to work on how to Plan data-driven instruction using student work samples, which will impact students’ achievement positively on both Regents exam and on coursework. Math teachers that teach CC Algebra and CC Geometry Oct. 2018-June 2019 Administration, teachers, Edison Teano, and DOE workshop presenters Math department will work on including writing as a means of demonstrating and supporting students' understanding of math concepts Science, Special Education and ELL departments will be scheduled to conduct inter-visitation cycles to observe best practices of other department CPT in, ELA/Global. The strategies will be adopted within their department for full implementation. PD on models of co-teaching and effective instructional strategies to promote learning for sub-groups of ELL/Special students. Science and Special Education Teacher and ELL Teacher teams Special Ed., ENL teachers and students Nov. 2018-Feb. 2019 Oct. 2018-June 2019 Science Department, Special Education department, Administration, ELA and Global department. Administration, outside agency for training and ENL/SWD teachers Monthly presentation to the PTA/SLT regarding progress to graduation by seniors. Parents, SLT members Nov. 2018-June 2019 Guidance and administration. 2 Administration and Guidance department will conduct individual conferences with off-track students and with their families as needed to devise and evaluate appropriate intervention plans. Off-track senior cohort September 2018 -June 2019 Administration and guidance staff. More frequent observation to be done with timely and specific feedback focusing on student assessment results that will incorporate strategic next steps of research based instructional practice (both struggling and non-struggling students) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will attend Curriculum Night, College Night, and PTA meetings to apprise themselves of the strategies currently implemented by JGS to support students at home such as the use of electronic data systems to monitor student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Hiring an Educational Consultant and Per-Session for PD for teachers, as well as paid substitute coverage for inter-visitation and off-site PD and visits. Per session for guidance staff for family conferences outside of the school day; refreshments for parents, translators for parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Scholarship data will be reviewed for increase rate of student achievement of at-risk students, especially sub-groups of ENL/SWD students at the end of each marking period. The Progress to Graduation Tracker will be used at the end of each term, January and June, to determine the graduation rate. Also, the effectiveness of teacher practice as given in Advance will be reviewed during administrative observational cycles of common planning time starting Oct. 2018 to June 2019. 3  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOSL reports at the end of each marking period for senior cohort students will be analyzed. The Progress to Graduation Tracker will be used at the end of each term, Summer, January and June, to determine the graduation rate. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school leader always communicates high expectations for student achievement. According to the QR: the school leadership regularly conveys high expectations leveraged via the Danielson Framework for Teaching and encouraging a culture where all constituencies understand the context of those expectations and work collaboratively to effectively meet them. According to the NYC 2018 School Survey, 93% of parents reported that they are well-informed by communications they receive from our school. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences plans to continue to participate in reciprocal communication with family by using the messaging component of Skedula/Pupilpath. To grant more easy access to their child's progress for parents, Skedula also has a phone app to notify parents of upcoming events, messages, and critical grades of students. Additionally, all staff emails are available through the school’s website and staff contact information has been given out at Freshman Orientation to involve parents early on. Curriculum Night for lower grades and College Night/FAFSA workshops for upper grades are offered to families. School community partners with families and community agencies to support student success. After guidance meetings, student needs are discussed and partners are utilized. For example, local NYPD is utilized to discuss bullying and the NYC Health Department conducts HIV/STD awareness and assessment for the entire student population. Families are provided with references and resources for outside assistance (ex. Safe Space, Family Assessment Program, Catholic Charities). According to the NYC School Survey, 93% of parents feel that they were well informed by the communication of the school; 93% of parents feel that they were greeted warmly when they called the school; 96% feel the school communicates in a language and a way in which they can understand. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences will continue with to work on developing parental involvement in school by using, Parent Newsletter, School Messenger, Skedula/Pupil Path and re-vamping our school website to be more user and parent friendly. Additionally, more plans to have fundraisers and events including parents at the school will be 5  instituted this school year. For example, parents will be invited to participate in this year's Breast Cancer Walk and families invited to attend the school's annual FALL HARVEST. Strengths:  Messaging system through Skedula to ensure reciprocal communication between school and family o Phone app through Skedula for convenience and timeliness  All staff email addresses accessible on school website  High expectations communicated to parents  Open door policy for families to visit guidance, parent coordinator, and school staff  Monthly newsletter (including important guidance topics)  Monthly PTA Meetings  SLT Parental involvement Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers, students, and families in engage in workshops and assemblies to deepen our work around building a positive culture, including a culture of trust, in our school, as evidenced in the survey scores for Family Engagement. There will be an increase of 5% parents response on the school survey who will report that teachers work closely with them in supporting their child through the integration of more regular parent outreach and monthly newsletters. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Various Workshops will be offered for Parents such as increasing positive family engagement, promising practices for student success, and adolescent education (ie. talking about sensitive topics), college information, AP for ALL, providing guidance to families on how to provide academic support, financial literacy, and college financial aid.) ENACT workshops for parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator; Guidance staff, outside agencies Parents/ Guardians of students grades 9-12 Parents/ guardians Every other month from ENACT Teaching Artist Fundraisers such as Breast Cancer Walk, Diabetes Walk, at which parents will be invited to participate. Parents/ guardians School Concert and FALL HARVEST Celebration of culture with parents and students both presenting at an annual Culture Night. Parents can bring cultural artifacts, present written pieces about their county or culture, dress in cultural clothing, etc. Parents/ Guardians of students grades 9-12 Continued avenues for parental involvement using: Skedula, monthly newsletter, PTA meetings, parent workshops, SLT, PTA events, fundraisers, award ceremonies, Principal’s letters posted online, and monitoring the number of parents who attend parent teacher conferences Sept 2018-June 2019 Parents/ Guardians of students grades 9-12 Students with disabilities and English Sept 2018-June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Social Worker will coordinate events/ Parent Coordinator Music Teacher will plan and organize the event March 2019 Social worker/ Support Staff/Parent Coordinator/ Administration/ Teachers/ Parent Coordinator/Guidance/Support Staff/Teachers/ Administration/ 7 Parents of students with disabilities and ENL students will attend an informational session with guidance in late October to familiarize parents with the supports available to their children and to themselves at the school and to meet the personnel responsible for meeting those needs. Language Learners Special education and ENL teachers, guidance counselors, social worker, administration. November 2019 Teacher- conducted workshops for different subject areas topics may include: Common Core standards, Regents information, academic planning Raffles will be held to increase parental involvement (ex. Thanksgiving turkey raffle). Parents/ Guardians of students grades 9-12 Parents/ Guardians of students grades 9-12 Once a month from November 2018-June 2019 October 2018-May 2019 Teachers/Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator/ Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. ENACT Parent Workshops NY Blood Bank Office of Emergency Management Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Collaboration with outside community agencies to conduct workshops for parents and students  Per session for staff members to conduct workshops and attend PTA Meetings  Money for Skedula  Refreshments for participants  Translators for meetings and workshops  Cost of ENACT 8  Prizes for raffles Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At mid-year, the end of January 2019, a school survey of 10 items designed by the school will be conducted for parents using Survey Monkey and making the link available on Skedula. Parent survey data will then be collected and analyzed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC School Survey; School Created Google Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students not meeting the required academic standard in this subject as evidenced by failing a subject for a given marking period (attaining less than 65); not completing the requirednumber of science labs for a Regentsscience class, failing required Regents exams needed for graduation (less than 65) or failing tests or other summativeassessments. NewsPaperclub that published news article every two months. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) DEAR program- independent reading and writing for at least 20 minutesACHIEVE 3000- online literacy program targeted at Lexile level of individualICT/SETSS-co-teaching in four main subject areas at each grade level, resource room support with special education teacher.Think Cerca Writing ProgramTutoring with subject teacherACE Club- focused on developing basic skills in subject area for example vocabulary, making inferences, predicting outcomes. Building writing skills, collaboration and decision making skills in working with their peers and adults. Development of interpersonal relationships across grade levels. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) School-wide, individual, small group, peer-tutoring, When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Once a week during the day After-school and at home Everyday during the day 0  Mathematics Science Social Studies Students not meeting the required academic standard in this subject. DEAR program, ICT/SETTS tutoring, ACE Students not meeting the required academic standard in this subject. DEAR program, ICT/SETTS, tutoring Students not meeting the required academic standard in this subject. DEAR program, ICT/SETTS, tutoring At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students not meeting the required age-appropriate, behavioral standard . Counseling, Speech, Evaluation, Mediation, Outside Referrals to city agencies and services Afterschoolevery day before and after school and during lunchtime; 2x per week Students meet 1x/week after-school. Once a week during the day, everyday. Lunch time two times per week. Once a week during the day, everyday School-wide, individual, small group, peer-tutoring, School-wide, individual, small group, tutoring School-wide, individual, small group, tutoring individual, small group Once a week during the day, everyday During the school day and before and after school. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Academic support services, social service referrals, counseling, college preparation, and school supplies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We recruit in the following manner: ● Use of teacher finder/Teach NYC/Open-Market ● Recommendations from other school personnel ● Attend Hiring Fair Interviews are conducted by a panel consisting of teachers and administrators. In addition to this, potential candidates are invited to perform a demo lesson. All teachers are assigned only to their licensed or licensed-related areas. Teachers are supported in the following manner for retention: ● Math/ELA coaches ● New teacher mentor ● Inter-visitation to other schools and to colleagues’ classes ● Participate in Common Planning Time three times per week ● Observation feedback with specific strategies for improvement Given an opportunity to be responsible for a non-academic activity Opportunities for leadership roles within the school 4  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Educational consultants and math coach provide push-in instructional support for teachers, including instructional feedback and strategies for improvement based on DANIELSON FRAMEWORK rubric. Teachers attend Field Support Center- and DOE- sponsored CCSS workshops and lab-site visits. Ramapo for children provide push-in classroom management coaching for selected teachers. Administrators attend ADVANCE training on new teacher evaluation system using DANIELSON FRAMEWORK rubric; Borough support-sponsored meetings, DATA SPECIALIST. Push-in teacher effectiveness coaching for administrators. Teachers meet in subject groups at least three times a week for academic collaboration. Administrators attend monthly professional development provided by the Central office, the district office, or the superintendent's office. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in professional learning regarding the use of multiple types of assessment, including school wide assessment, classroom data and looking at student work to modify their instruction and to determine next steps for students . Based on this, teachers decide within teacher teams during Common Planning Time and in staff development which assessment tool to use in collecting data. 5  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 6-ELT Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 240,666 Title II, Part A Federal 0 Title III, Part A Federal 12,366.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,630,178 X X X Section7-AIS Per session for teachers in every section Section 6-ELT Section7-AIS Translatorsfor section 5C LEADprogram PD for section 5C PDfor ENL teachers in section 5C Section 6- ELT Section7- AIS 6  PDfor teachersin every section Persession for teachers in every section Fundingfor educational consultants in 5B, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 7  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA (Every Student Succeeds Act), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 9  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 0  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 1  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2 I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teachers or other school staff member; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 3  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teachers about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: There will be two Title III After School Programs for the 2018-19 school year. Program #1 The focus of the Title III ACE Program will be on reading, writing, speaking and listening skills using ESL methodologies and techniques. This program will also help English Language Learners to develop their academic English and improve achievement in core content areas. The ACE program will help struggling ELL students develop their English language skills in the modality areas of listening, speaking, reading and writing in grades 9-12 with heterogenous grouping (Entering/Emerging, Transitioning, and Expanding/Commanding). The program will help students improve their academic skills in the content areas of English Language Arts and Science, as well as to increase the success rate of them passing the Regents Exams. Invitations to attend this program will be given out to students in school and letters will be sent home in home languages to inform parents about this program. Students will be required to sign in each time they attend ACE and attendance will be monitored by the ENL teacher to encourage those students who are not attending consistently. The 2017 NYSESLAT data indicated that only a few students moved up a proficiency level. This was attributed to the lack of an ELL teacher throughout the 2016-17 school year. These results demonstrate the need for additional after-school supports such as this ACE Program. This program aims to support both the content areas and to improve their passing rates for Program #2 The ENL certified teacher will also push-in to after-school tutoring and Regents Prep with the content certified teacher for Living Environment and English. This will provide more individualized attention to help ENL students be successful. The targeted group of students will be ENL 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th graders who have not passed the Living Environment and/or English Regents exams. The need for this collaborative after-school tutoring is based on the June 2018 Regents data. In June 2018, 54% of ELL students who took the Living Environment Regents were unsuccessful in passing with a 65 or higher. In addition, 62% of ELL students who took the ELA Regents did not pass with a score of 65 or higher. These numbers indicate a need for the ENL- certified teacher to provide individual assistance to students during Regents Prep to help them with content, strategies, and to develop critical thinking/writing skills. Students are required to sign in as they enter Regents prep. Attendance and progress will be monitored by the ENL teacher and the content teacher to monitor areas of improvement and to encourage students who are not attending consistently. Schedule and duration The After-School Title III ACE Program will run from October 2, 2018 to June 13, 2019. In addition to the ACE program, after-school tutoring and Regents Prep will also begin in October 2018 and will run until Regents week in June 2019. The ELL teacher will push in to English Regents Prep once a week and also Living Environment Regents prep once a week. 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Materials and Resources Materials necessary for the Title III program will be Arabic/English Visual Dictionaries, Spanish/English Dictionaries, Bengali/English Visual Dictionaries, Haitian-Creole/English, NYSESLAT test booklets, Teacher's Manual for NYSESLAT Test Booklets, Non-Fiction Texts, Fiction Texts, and Regents Exam Glossaries in home languages. These dictionaries and glossaries will help students develop their academic English because students will be able to understand the words in their own language, thus, increasing their comprehension of the word. NYSESLAT Test booklets will help students develop students develop their writing skills while the non-fiction and fiction texts will allow students to develop their critical thinking and critical writing in content areas along with online resources. Past Living Environment and ELA Regents Exams will also be utilized to familiarize students with vocabulary and the necessary reading, comprehension, and writing skills required to master the exam. Regents preparatory books will be unique to ENL students who participate in the after-school co-taught Regents Prep classes. All the other materials will both be offered during after-school programs and used for daily instruction. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In order to help English Language Learners develop their reading, writing, speaking and listening skills, content teachers need strategies to help English Language Learners understand the material. In order to provide teachers with these strategies, Jamaica Gateway will provide a sequence of Professional Development Workshops for teachers. Ten teachers in the following content areas will participate in the workshops: Math, Science, English, Social Studies, Health and ENL Teachers will be able to sign up for the Professional Development, including the Title III teachers. The Professional Development workshops will occur during some of the faculty meetings and will be conducted every other month. The Professional Development workshops will be led by Smart Start and will focus on data driven techniques that foster English Language Learner student success. The schedule of workshops are as follows: Session #1: October 15, 2018 from 3:00 pm to 3:40 pm Session #2: December 3, 2018 from 3:00 pm to 3:40 pm Session #3: February 4, 2019 from 3:00 pm to 3:40 pm Session #4: April 1, 2019 from 3:00 om to 4:30 pm The topics to be covered will be: Strategies to help English Language Learners with content information, October 15, 2018 Differentiating for English Language Learners within the classroom, December 3, 2018 Strategies to help English Language Learners develop their vocabulary skills, February 11, 2019 In addition, in-school PD days and department meetings will include a session of collaboration where teachers can discuss best practices to use with students (with a special focus on ELL students). All staff will have to sign an attendance sheet for professional development. A copy 7  Part C: Professional Development of attendance and agenda will be saved both on paper and electronically (scanned in to the computer and kept by the Principal). As a result of the professional development lessons, all teachers will implement best practices and strategies for ENL students and in turn, will help students achieve academic success, develop language, and increase Regents scores. With this in place, we expect that more ELL students will graduate on time and display college readiness. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parental involvement is important to our school community. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences will host workshops to help parents understand what skills English Language Learners will need in order to succeed. Workshops will help parents understand what the NYSESLAT exam is and how they can help their child prepare for this exam. Parents will be notified of these activities by sending home letters translated in their home language and ELL students will be invited to attend by ENL teacher and ENL Guidance Counselor. Phone calls will also be made to parents using the DOE Translation and Interpretation Services. Translation services will be provided at the workshops in the languages that have been requested. Parent involvement will be documented with a sign-in sheet and the Parent Coordinator will keep these records. Understanding the NYSESLAT is important for parents so that they may encourage students to practice critical reading and writing skills at home. Because not many of our ELL students moved up a proficiency level in 2017, there is a large number of ELL students who may not be supported both at school and at home. Our goal is to help educate ELL parents about what they can do to help support their children so that all ELL students can be successful. We will host two workshops for parents, one in the fall and one in the Spring. October 25th, 2018 6PM - 8PM ACADEMIC SUPPORT AND BEST STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS During this workshop, parents will learn about effective ELL strategies that they can use at home to help develop their child's academic vocabulary. This will help impact higher achievement for ELLs because parents will be able to provide strategies to help their child in areas they are struggling in. Parents will also be made aware of services and supports in place for their ELL scholars (ACE, Regents Prep, etc.). Graduation and promotion requirements will be discussed along with high expectations of all students. March 20, 2019 6PM - 8PM NYSESLAT TESTING AND REGENTS SUPPORT During this workshop, parents will learn about the NYSESLAT exam and how they can help support their child at home with strategies to do well on the exam. This will help impact higher achievement for ELLs because students will get the support they need at home to move up levels on the NYSESLAT Exam. Other strategies will be discussed for Regents support such as good study habits, time management, and other tips for success. Regents prep, ACE, and NYSESLAT 8 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities tutoring will be advertised again for students, especially those who have not been attending consistently. These workshops will be led by the certified ENL Teacher, certified ELA Teacher, and Certified Science Teacher. Additionally, the school's ENL Guidance Counselor will be present to discuss graduation requirements and answer any questions parents may have. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences Borough Queens School Number 350 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Caren Birchwood-Taylor Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Cristina Speirs Teacher/Subject Area Tara Mendoza/ Spanish, ENL Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Satanya Mc Laughlin Coach N/A School Counselor Leydy Esposito Parent Juliette Graham Parent Coordinator Gresis McGroarty Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 526 Total number of ELLs 56 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.65% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As we are a high school, we do not assess the early literacy skills of ELLs. However, we do assess literacy skills through the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL as well as through the reading diagnostic provided by the Achieve3000 literacy program. The data reveals that ELLs are reading below grade level. This data has helped inform our school's instructional plan in the following ways: (1) explicit literacy instruction across the curriculum, (2) increased support for literacy through the creation of after school programs that have literacy as their focus, and (3) the implementation of the Drop Everything and Read (D.E.A.R.) program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 1  Outside ENL consultant; Common planning time for teachers, dedicated guidance counselor for ENL students, special after school program for ENL students. Our school hired an educational consultant from Teaching Matters, Marie Underwood, to work with our ENL teacher in developing a comprehensive Curriculum for the stand alone ESL class. Ms. Underwood worked with our ENL teacher Ms. Speirs to create Curriculum and unit plans that embed varying levels of assessments to meet the different levels of ENL learners. The assessments created engages students to practice reading, writing, speaking and listening. In addition to this, Ms. Speirs was sent to two summer PDs to learn about the “Essential Elements for ELL/MLL instruction” as well as “Integrated ENL/Co-teaching focus”. Also, as an added resource material, ACHIEVE 3000 is integrated into the curriculum for ENL students to practice reading and writing in English. This program software differentiates the reading assignments based upon each student Lexile level. Students use the program two times a week during class time, of either the standalone ESL class and/or their regularly scheduled ELA class. Lastly, our school is forming a partnership with Lincoln Center to join the LEAD program in the spring term. LEAD (Literacy, English and Academic Development) program works primarily with ENL students to promote English Language development using a theatre approach. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our program is evaluated on an ongoing basis by the ENL teacher, the administration, and the inquiry team. The efficacy of the program is evaluated by conducting classroom visits, looking at scholarship data, and examining test scores from Regents exams, the NYSESLAT, and the ELL Periodic Assessment. We also look at participation in advanced placement courses and the High School graduation rate. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The summative data identifies students levels of English acquisition and other academic skills in need of intervention and support. Interventions include academic supports such as tutoring, regents prep, and Saturday school. After the data is collected from the summative assessment, the ENL teacher Ms. Speirs collaborates with subject teachers such as ELA/Global to create an itemized action plan for the lacking skills. The plan of action is then written into each subject teacher’s lesson plan and implemented during instructional sessions with the ENL students. Thereafter, formative assessments are conducted on a weekly frequent basis to evaluate students’ progress, and implementing further modifications and supports, if necessary. Additionally, Ms. Speirs works with our ENL Guidance counselor to gather further information on what at home may be interfering with their learning; for those students who seem uncooperative in advancing their learning. The information is then used to strategically plan on how to work best with the student to achieve academic success. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the NYSITELL has revealed that most of our students are scoring at transitional levels. We had one student scoring at an emerging level while one student scored commanding on the NYSITELL. NYSESLAT scores revealed that students who were beginners and intermediate all moved up one level. There were a few students who were advanced that stayed at the advanced level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Stakeholders are informed of the findings by administration.Recommendations for adjusting programs are facilitated by teacher's common planning time, faculty meetings, department meetings, and Inquiry teams. The data collected through ATS (RLAT & Regents itemized Analysis) is shared with all of our teachers. We frequently examine the scores of ENL students to conduct a deep data analysis study to better understand what standards the students are meeting or not meeting using the following criteria: below level, approaching proficiency, meeting or exceeding proficiency. This study is done within subject departments. After the data analysis study, department teachers will then strategically plan with their colleagues on how to develop a systematic method of using varying types of scaffolds at various entry points within 2  their lessons. These strategies ranges from using “Multiple Intelligence of Learning Style” to “Kagan Cooperative learning”. Action plan is revisited on a weekly basis within each department during CPT (Teacher Common Planning Time) and revised. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding English as a new language (ENL) programs provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Entering students get two units of stand alone in ENL and one unit of integrated ENL. Emerging students get one unit of stand alone ENL and one unit of integrated ENL. Integrated ENL students will be grouped homogeneously, with students of the same level in each class. Instruction will be delivered by a dually certified teacher (ENL and a content area) or co-teaching by a certified ENL teacher and a certified content area teacher. Transitioning students get one unit of integrated ENL. Expanding students get one unit of integrated ENL. Commanding students also get one unit of integrated ENL. Students that receive Stand alone ENL are scheduled by their grades. We have one Stand alone for 9-10 and another stand alone for 11-12. Students who receive integrated ENL are scheduled by their grades as well. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Beginning/Entering level students are given three periods of ENL per day (540 minutes per week); Low Intermediate/Emerging Level students have two periods of ENL each day (360 minutes per week), Intermediate/Transitioning and Advanced/Expanding Level students will have one period of ENL per day (180 minutes per week) and Proficient/Commanding level students receive .5 periods per day ENL (90 minutes per week). : The school does not have a bilingual program; only a standalone ENL model including integrated co-teaching of ELA classes. The programming of ENL students are provided below in Table 1.1: Levels of ENL Teaching Periods/Week Beginner/Entering 2 periods of standalone ENL (96 mins.) + 1 period of ELA (48 mins) x 5 days/week=720 minutes Low Intermediate/Emerging 2 periods of standalone ENL (96 mins.) + 1 period of ELA (48 mins) x 5 days/week=720 minutes 3  Intermediate/Transitioning 1 period of standalone ENL(48 minutes) + 1 period of ELA (48 minutes) x5 days/week=480 minutes Advanced/Expanding 1 period of ELA (48 minutes) x5 days/week=240 minutes Proficient/Commanding (up to 2yrs. of services offered after tested out) 1 period of ELA (48 minutes) x5 days/week=240minutes 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Integrated ENL Model, the ENL teacher and content classroom teacher work together to help the ENL students. They are using the book "Their Eyes Were Watching God." In this ENL/ELA integrated classroom, they use different instructional approaches and methods to make content comprehensible and make language development natural. They use worksheets reinforcing skills taught, video clips, images, visuals, illustrations are displayed on the SMART Board to reinforce development, growth of major characters in the text. Also the teachers provide guided practice prompting students to explain events and their impact using textual evidence. The teachers use their NYSESLAT levels to determine which students need what type of scaffolding, students are encouraged to turn and talk, and there is a timer placard on each desk to encourage accountable talk. There are vocabulary words with definitions and synonyms. ENL students are given time to stop and jot their thoughts and write short responses. Other strategies such as repetition, note taking skills, underlining, highlighting, bilingual dictionaries, student generated questions and high performing students helping those emerging in English. Students use exit slips and there are checks for prior knowledge. The use of technology as an instructional support for ELLs includes SMART Boards, student laptops, and the Achieve3000 program. Other instructional materials include textbooks, workbooks, worksheets, and reference materials. The ENL teacher collaborates with content area teachers to supplement and modify materials in order to support all levels of proficiency. Bilingual reference materials such as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are purchased in students' home languages as needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Members of the Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences school community regard ELLs' home languages as a resource. Native language support is delivered by peers through collaborative learning. ELLs are allowed to first write in their native language for some assignments and then translate their writing into English. ELLs have access to bilingual reference materials such as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. We are currently growing our native language library which features bilingual texts and literature in students' native languages. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 4  Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences differentiates instruction for ELL subgroups. a. Our instruction plan for SIFE is as follows. After completing the SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire, the Academic Language and Literacy Diagnostic (ALLD) will be administered to students who report an interruption of more than two years in their formal education. Students with a home language other than English or Spanish will instead provide a brief writing sample and complete a reading comprehension passage in their native language, which will be evaluated by the NYC DOE Translation unit. Following diagnostic assessment, interventions for SIFES would include literacy development, extended day, guidance, and the use of modified texts and materials to make content classes comprehensible. b. ELLs in U.S. schools less than 3 years are given special attention in the ENL classroom. The buddy system is used, and newcomers are paired with Advanced ELLs who preferably speak the same home language. Additionally, each content area teacher receives extra support in delivering instruction to newcomers as well as regular verbal and written check-ins by the ESL teacher to monitor the progress of these students. Achieve3000, peer tutoring, teacher-led tutoring, and the extended day program are all used to help newcomers progress. c. ELLs receiving services for 4 to 6 years are supported and challenged in their ENL and content area classes. These students participate in peer tutoring, teacher-led tutoring, and the extended day program. Instruction for these students is similar to instruction for their peers who are on grade level, but is differentiated according to language proficiency with extra emphasis on grammar, word work, and reading instruction. Achieve3000 is also used with these students. d. Long-term ELLs receive instruction similar to that of their peers who are on grade level, but there is extra emphasis on reading and writing. The rationale for this is that these students, as per the NYSESLAT, are already proficient in speaking and listening. Long-term ELLs also participate in peer-tutoring, teacher-led tutoring, and the extended day program. Achieve3000 is also used with these students. Additionally, tutoring for Regents exams is emphasized for this subgroup. e. Former ELLs receive academic support through academic tutoring 90 minutes a week to fulfill the mandated minutes. Also, ELLs get testing accommodations on NYS assessments for up to 2 years after testing at the proficient level on the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All ELL-SWDs travel together with a certified Special Education teacher who is their Collaborative Team Teacher (CTT) for each content area. Students' IEPs are followed diligently. ELL-SWDs use the same materials to ensure that ELL and Special Education instructional strategies are used in each content area, such as, graphic organizers, iPads, visual and auditory stimulation, sentence stems, Achieve 3000 and bilingual dictionaries. Students are scheduled for classes according to their grade level and their NYSESLAT test scores to ensure ENL mandated minutes. To accelerate English Language learning, teachers of ELL-SWDs structure their instructional program and course offerings to meet the specific needs of their students, modify materials, provide opportunities for teachers to share and discuss individual student performance and add time to their regular school day to ensure that ELL-SWDs receive the support they need. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are programmed for the same ENL classes and general education ELLs, as per their proficiency level. In order to provide the least restrictive environment, all ELL-SWDs are part of a CTT class that includes mainstream students. Our school uses flexible scheduling so that students have access to the full continuum of services offered by our school and to allow the opportunity for students to spend maximum time with non-disabled peers. To ensure this, the ENL Teacher, Special Education teachers and guidance counselors work together. We also have a SETTS environment where students receive services to assist in helping them obtain grade level standards. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences targets every subgroup to receive interventions delivered in English for ELA, math, social studies, and science. Interventions include peer tutoring and teacher-led tutoring for all content areas. The extended day program focuses on science instruction one day per week, math instruction one day per week and ELA instruction two days per week. Additionally, all ELLs are encouraged to attend tutoring for specific Regents exams depending on their grade 5  level. Achieve 3000 is used as a literacy intervention for all subgroups. Achieve 3000 is used in English with native language support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? By engaging each subject department in data analysis, we have identified a common trend that is seen among ENL students are lacking proficiency or confidence to write comprehensible sentences. As a result, the faculty has undergone and will be continuing training offered through the DOE as well as to continue the partnership with “Teaching Matters” to have a consultant share best instructional strategies on developing ENL students’ writing practices. Also, teachers across all subjects are instructed to have writing assignments on a daily basis being used as part of their assessment tool; either during the entry segment of the lesson or as exit slips at the end. This practice will help to intensify the writing process and at the same time have teachers provide meaningful feedback to ENL students on how to edit their writing for several drafts leading to a final product. The LEAD Program will be implemented this upcoming school year. It is a program that allows English Language Learners to develop their English skills using theatre strategies. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, no programs/services for ELLs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences has a number of after school programs and supplemental services such as clubs, athletics, the extended day program, peer tutoring, teacher led tutoring and Regents preparation. Tutoring is available after school. Announcements are made over the loudspeaker, posters are posted around the school, teachers encourage students to stay after school. We have cultural clubs with the goal to have students take an active part in their community. ENL students are presented on sports teams, in clubs and have access to all programs. All students, including ENL are encouraged on a daily basis to attend clubs and academic after school programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The use of technology is an instructional support for ELLs includes SMART Boards, student laptops, iPads and the Achieve 3000 program. Other instructional materials include textbooks, workbooks, worksheets and reference materials. The ENL Teacher collaborates with content area teachers to supplement and modify materials by providing graphic organizers in order to support all levels of proficiency. Bilingual reference materials such as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are purchased in students' home languages as needed. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Members of the Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences school community regard ELLs' home languages as a resource. Native language support is delivered by peers through collaborative learning. ELLs are allowed to first write in their native language for some assignments and then translate their writing into English. ELLs have access to bilingual reference materials such as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. We are currently growing our native language library which features bilingual texts and literature in students' native languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Student support services providing counseling according to ELLs grade levels and ages. Along with the ENL Teacher advocating for her students by providing many different resources for the ENL students, college information and scholarship and financial information is provided to all juniors and seniors. The ENL counselor pushes in the classroom to discuss college information and successful strategies with the ENL students. This information is provided to all students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 6  The use of technology is an instructional support for ELLs includes SMART Boards, student laptops, iPads and the Achieve 3000 program. Other instructional materials include textbooks, workbooks, worksheets and reference materials. The ENL Teacher collaborates with content area teachers to supplement and modify materials by providing graphic organizers in order to support all levels of proficiency. Bilingual reference materials such as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are purchased in students' home languages as needed. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students are invited to attend our summer bridging program, SPELL Academy. The SPELL Academy is designed to help students transition from middle school to high school both academically and socially. This spirited and high energy academic acceleration and enrichment program exposes students to the academic rigor they should anticipate as freshmen and provide opportunities for them to gain the skills and confidence to excel in school and achieve college and career goals, opening doors of opportunity. Along with improving academic skills, students become familiar with the high school building, make friendships with their peers and build relationships with teachers from their new high school that will aid them in their freshman year and beyond. The goals of the program are to: • Assist rising ninth graders with their transition from middle school to the academically challenging high school environment through a variety of enrichment, social, and orientation activities that are designed to give students a head start towards a successful high school experience. • Introduce students to key high school faculty who will be teaching in the Freshman Institute or working with freshmen during the 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Literacy class is offered as additional support for ELA. Spanish as a foreign language (LOTE) is offered to ELLs for native language support. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences' professional development for ELL personnel is as follows. ELL topics and issues are discussed during our monthly faculty meetings for all staff, our weekly CPT meetings, and our staff development days. The ENL teacher supports content teachers by teaching them ENL methodologies and ENL instructional strategies to use during content instruction. The ENL teacher provides this support during meetings and common planning times. The ENL teacher attends professional development sessions for instruction and compliance throughout the year. The staff is provided with professional development on November 3 rd . 2. The ENL teacher receives PD in the form of those sessions offered by the NYC DOE, sessions offered by outside organizations, webinars, and by reading about research concerning ELLs and the CCLS. These PDs will help with vocabulary development and questioning techniques which are aligned to the CCLS. 7  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 3. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences provides staff with support to assist ELLs as they transition from middle to high school. All incoming ELLs are invited to attend SPELL Academy, which was described above. The staff is encouraged to establish a buddy system for ELLs in their content classes. All students meet with the guidance counselor at least once, and then on an as-needed basis. Students are encouraged to join clubs and after-school activities in order to interact with peers and explore academic interests. 4. In order to be in compliance with the Jose P. requirements, all staff will receive 7.5 hours of ELL professional development (10 hours for special education teachers) from the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher meets with content teachers during common planning to discuss and implement strategies to support the instruction of ELLs. The ENL teacher also delivers PD on ELL topics during staff development days. Resources from the LAP Toolkit as well as research on best practices are made available to all staff. PD records, such as agendas, materials, and minutes, are maintained by the administration. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1.The ENL/ESL Teacher works closely with the guidance counselor who is assigned to ELL students. The guidance counselor and ENL teacher meet weekly to discuss any students that are struggling. These parents are contacted and a meeting is scheduled to update the parents of their child's language development process and language development in all content areas. Once parents come in for the meeting, they are signs posted for them regarding translation services. These meetings are in addition to the mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE scheduled parent-teacher conferences. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 3. Parental involvement is important to our school community. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences has an active PTA that meets on either the second or third Wednesday of the month from 6:00p.m. to 7:00p.m. All members of the staff are responsible for parent outreach and communication with families about school programs, important school decisions, and student progress and needs. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences maintains a website with information for parents. Website content can be translated into 52 different languages. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences supports oral interpretation, written translation, and dissemination of information materials in the family's preferred language. Preferred language is identified by administering our school's Student Home Language Survey (SHLS). The SHLS also allows school leadership as well as the ENL teacher to identify parents who would like to volunteer as translators for fellow parents. We will provide ELL parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a variety of literacy, math, and homework workshops, so that they can better assist in the education and learning of their children at home. Instructional materials and snacks will be purchased to support parent activity. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8  9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Caren Birchwood Taylor, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Jamaica Gateway to the Science School DBN: 28Q350 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Caren Birchwood-Taylor Principal Satanya McLaughlin Assistant Principal Gresis McGroarty Parent Coordinator Cristina Speirs ENL/Bilingual Teacher Juliette Graham Parent Tara Mendoza/Spanish, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Leydy Esposito School Counselor Juan Mendez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 11/21/17 11/21/17 11/21/17 11/21/17 11/21/17 11/21/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 11/21/17 11/21/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q350 School Name: Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Cristina Greisis Speirs McGroarty ENL Coordinator Parent Coordinator No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences uses a variety of data and methodologies to assess our school's written translation and oral translation needs. Enrollees who are new to public school must have a parent/guardian fill out the Parents' Preferred Language Form and the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). Data from part 3 of the HLIS is used to establish parents' preferred language for written communication and oral communication from the school. For our 37 current ELLs, the school secretary uses the RHLA code in ATS to establish home language for written and oral communication. Additionally, our school administers a Student Home Language Survey, created in-house, to all students. The survey asks for information about home language, preferred language for written communication, and preferred language for oral communication. This survey also asks if parents/guardians are willing to volunteer as translators for their fellow parents. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Afrikkaan Arabic Bengali Bhili Chinese Dari French Haitian Creole Hindi Nahuatl Nepali English Pilipino Punjabi Polish Russian Spanish Urdu 1 6 123 1 3 1 2 4 2 0 2 .12 .75 15.32 .12 .37 .12 .25 .5 .25 0 .25 1 6 123 1 3 0 2 5 2 1 2 .12 .75 15.32 .12 .37 0 .25 .62 .25 .12 .25 567 70.61 562 69.99 1 13 1 1 63 12 .12 1.62 .12 .12 7.85 1.49 1 14 1 2 65 12 .12 1.74 .12 .25 8.09 1.49 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. No preferred parent language is at or above 10% 3  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Documents that our school typically disseminates every year that require translation are parent teacher conferences, Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Principal's letter to parents-Every marking period Google translate The Big Word, Bi-lingual staff in Spanish, Haitian-Creole, Arabic PTC-November, March Testing dates: March Parent Workshops-November, March After school program information, New York State testing dates Principal's letter to parents-Every marking period Google translate letters home, parent workshops PTC-November, March Google translate , The Big Word, Bi-lingual staff in Spanish, Haitian-Creole, Arabic Meeting with the ENL teacher regarding student NYSITELL services and NYSESLAT testing dates Testing dates: March Google translate Parent workshops-November, March The Big Word, Bi-lingual staff in Spanish, Haitian-Creole, Arabic 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 4  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide September-Curriculum night November/March-PTC ENL meeting in November Parent Workshop in March September-Curriculum night interpretation service(s)? Translators from NYCDOE vendor The Big Word funded using the school budget Translators from NYCDOE vendor The Big Wordfunded using the school budget November/March-PTC ENL meeting in November Translators from NYCOE vendor The Big Wordfunded using the school budget Parent workshops in March Translators from NYCDOE vendor The Big Word funded using the school budget Jamaica Gateway to the Sciences has many formal meetings face to face with parents. We have Parent -Teacher Conferences in the Fall and Spring, we have curriculum night (September), we have Open House night (November). We also have ENL meetings for parents to help educate them on strategies they can use at home to help their child(Spring). We also have formal and informal meetings with parents by the guidance counselor and the parent coordinator regarding student progress (Ongoing throughout the year). 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Use school messenger,(automated phone calls) text messaging in different languages 5  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. PD in summer for all staff Translators from Translation and Interpretation Unit (phone or written translation); In person translation School Messenger System (Spanish) Google translate Software School Employee translators Parent coordinator Activities funded by allocations in Galaxy Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663, parents are provided with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Translated versions of the Parent Bill of Rights are made available in students' home languages. Additionally, signage posted in the main office indicates the availability of language services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Mechanisms our school will use to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services are parent surveys and and feedback forms. We will also consult with the PTA as to how to meet the needs of the non-English speaking parents. Gathering feedback from teachers, guidance and supervisors is also done. 6 
