 29Q356 School Name: COMMUNITY VOICES MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: RYAN T. BRANCH   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Community Voices Middle School 29Q356 34290001356 6-8 School Number (DBN): 145-00 Springfield Blvd., Springfield Gardens, NY 11413 718-977-6180 Phone Number: 718-977-6182 Fax: Carol Folds cfolds@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 29 Email Address: Ryan Branch Lisa Smith Ian Barnes Jason Rubinstein MakebaKeane na na na District Information BeverlyMitchell Superintendent: 222-14 Jamaica Avenue Rm. 217, Queens Village, New York 11428 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: Bmitche2@schools.nyc.gov 718-264-3146 ext. 217 718-264-3148 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilkes FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd. Mwilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-642-5739 Phone Number: 718-642-5705 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ryan Branch Lisa Smith Ian Barnes Danna Nelson Anastasia Lipari Jason Rubinstein *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MagaliGomez MargretPalmer Makeba Kean Beautiful Walsh Sheila Smith Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Community Voices Middle School 356 (CoVo) believes in the philosophy of “Speaking Success into Existence” to foster productive struggle among our scholars. Through teacher collaboration, we empower scholars and their families to take ownership of their achievements in order to become change drivers for our diverse and dynamic world. We provide scholars with creative outlets and transferable learning opportunities to strengthen their academic foundation while developing their critical thinking and problem-solving skills. Scholars become critically conscious self-starters when immersed in a nurturing, culturally responsive environment that fosters inquiry and discovery.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We have strategically partnered with the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) in order to improve literacy across the content in our school. This past year, our entire school focused on implementing Word Generation. Word Generation is a research-based vocabulary program designed to teach middle school students academic vocabulary through language arts, math, science, and school studies. This allowed our students to have multiple exposures to words and develop a deeper understanding of these vocabulary words in different contexts. This year, we will continue our partnership with MSQI to focus on strategic reading in order to implement reading interventions and support to our 6th grade students. CoVo participated in a writing program with Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project to improve writing across the grades. Staff members have been trained and are currently implementing the Rewards program to support students that are reading below grade level. Community Voices Middle School has also partnered with Urban Advantage to foster critical thinking through scientific inquiry, as well as to expose our students to different science cultural institutions. As a middle school, we also understand the importance of students' social and emotional needs and youth development, as result teamed up with Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation, our Community Based Organization (CBO), to give our students opportunities to become well rounded individuals. To track and reward students for complying with behavioral and academic expectations CoVo has implemented the PBIS Rewards Application where students can purchase items and gain access to privileges by accumulating "CoVo Cash Points" for being "Respectful, Responsible, Safe and Prepared". 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. CoVo is comprised of 6% English Language Learners (ELLs), 26% Students with Disabilities (SWDs), 87% Black, 9% Hispanic and 4% Other. The total number of students enrolled at CoVo is 311. CoVo is in the process of re-branding itself and we plan on incorporating the previous social justice vision into our new entrepreneurial and financial literacy initiatives. In addition to teaching and encouraging the students to use their voices to collaborate with their peers to be the change they want to see in the world, we would like to incorporate various electives, financial literacy, and video production to encourage young entrepreneurship. We have introduced project-based learning, the STEM program, robotics, and chess to provide students with additional outlets to express themselves. Each grade at CoVo has a specific focus and is named after a leader representing that focus: 6th grade-The Barack Obama Academy for Community and Leadership; 7th grade is the Shirley Chisholm Academy for Empowerment and Social Change; and, 8th grade is the Nelson Mandela Academy for Global Change. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress was Collaborative Teachers. Teachers met in teams with a focus on looking at student work to identify gaps in student learning and teacher practice. Teachers were willing to provide each other with feedback and share best practices. Professional development was released to the teachers, resulting in lead teachers facilitating the work in department teams. Our area of focus for this year is Supportive Environment. As middle school educators, we fully understand the importance of teaching the “whole” child. Understanding this delicate stage in our students’ development, as they become more independent thinkers, we are constantly challenged to seek ways that promote their academic, social, and emotional growth. It is imperative that our learning environment provide each of our students a nurturing and loving atmosphere, where high expectations are the norm and each of our children feel safe and supported. 0  During the 2016-2017 school year, our school has made the most growth in English Language Arts (ELA), evidenced by the New York State ELA assessment. While we are excited about our progress in ELA, we still have the challenge of improving our math performance. Therefore, we have revised our curriculum to better meet the needs of our students, invested in professional development to in order to improve teacher practice, and provided targeted intervention to our children. In addition, we continue to focus on the needs of our special education population, in both ELA and Math, by ensuring that this subgroup of students has appropriate access to the curriculum by differentiating instruction, scaffolding task, implementing various strategies for grouping, and providing additional interventions after school and on Saturdays. Our ELL population will be utilizing the Imagine Learning computer based program and will also be provided with various strategies 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 29Q356 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 302 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 46 47 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 67.2% % Reduced Lunch 5.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) 1.0% 9.6% 0.7% % Black or African American % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.74 0% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 34 35 90.7% 2.3% 26.5% 86.4% 1.7% 1.7% 4 34% 8.8 11.3% 28% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Quality Guide, Community Voices Middle School met target in both ELA and Math. Teachers at CoVo will continue to focus on ensuring that unit and lesson plans are appropriately aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and the New York Citywide Instructional Expectations. However, while students made progress on the New York State assessments, we need to continue to focus on closing the achievement gap for our low performing students by providing these students with access (through multiple entry points and differentiated instruction) to demanding tasks that cognitively challenge them. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will reduce the gap in constructed response questions between our school and the city by .05 points as measured by the ELA NYS exam data and increase our level 3's and 4's by 5%. Ongoing periodic assessments, daily exit tickets and utilization of computer-based programs such as i-Ready will track student progress and aid teachers in creating flexible groups to provide students access to CCLS aligned curriculum using multiple entry points. Teachers will develop hands-on tasks with measurable learning objectives through Project Based Learning that will be further developed through the Learning Partnership Program. Writing across the curriculum will be monitored through student portfolios and classroom journals. Teachers will improve their questioning and discussion techniques to foster critical thinking skills for our students. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: All Teachers and Paraprofessionals August 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, and Lead Teachers 1. Teacher Teams will meet weekly to collaboratively develop assessments aligned to the curriculum. 2. Teachers will use formative and summative assessment data in order to strategically group students (i.e. pre -post assessments, exit tickets, student work, and rubrics) 3. Teachers will follow a Data Driven Instruction (DDI) protocol in which they will administer an assessment, perform an item analysis, group students according to need, re-teach the necessary skill/concept not learned and reassess. 4. Teachers will monitor and adjust curricula based on the data by providing supports to meet the needs of all learners . 5. Administrators and teacher leaders will develop differentiated professional development focusing on creating lessons with multiple entry points and flexible grouping. Administrators will provide professional development on the DDI Cycle using the text, Driven by Data. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): ELL, Students with disabilities, At-risk students August 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal 1. Students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-need student subgroups will be provided with customized instruction to meet their learning needs (ie. strategic reading blocks, AIS and I-ready technology programs). Imagine Learning will be used to enrich instruction for ELLs. The Rewards program will be used to address the 4  needs of students reading below grade level through six week cycles. Our SETSS teacher will utilize the Max Scholar computer program to increase engagement while servicing SETSS students. 2. Teacher Teams will work closely with the IEP teacher and the ENL teacher in order to provide targeted groups with scaffolds such as visual aids, tiered tasks and sentence starters to assist with discussion. 3. Teacher lesson plans will incorporate multiple entry points for English Language Learners and students with disabilities aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement: All teachers 1. Communicate the instructional focus with parents during PTA meetings, on the school website, through school messenger and backpack notices, Curriculum Night, Skedula/Pupil Path, progress reports and the monthly school calendar. 2. Articulate the progress of students through our PBIS Rewards program, Parent-Teacher/Student-led conferences, Parent Engagement Tuesdays, Skedula, and academic celebrations. Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust All teachers 1. Our Professional Learning Community will develop teacher leaders and build capacity by pairing new, developing and ineffective teachers with more experienced, effective and highly effective teachers based on their Advance ratings. Teachers will have inter-visitation opportunities and mentoring sessions built into their weekly schedules. Implement “collegial buddies” so that new teachers would be partnered with seasoned teachers for support and non-evaluative feedback. 2. 3. Provided differentiated professional development; data meetings with Principal; Instructional Cabinet made up of teachers and administrators working together to make instructional decisions that impact student achievement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement August 2018- June 2019 School Leadership Team, Principal, Assistant Principal, and Parent Coordinator August 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Deans, and Guidance Counselor, and Teacher Leaders 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Communicate the instructional focus with parents during PTA meetings, on the school website, through school messenger and backpack notices, Curriculum Night, Skedula, and the monthly school calendar. Articulate the progress of students through our PBIS Rewards program, Parent-Teacher/Student-led Conferences, Parent Engagement Tuesdays, Skedula, and academic celebrations. Our Dean and Social Worker will supervise the PBIS Rewards program to ensure teachers reward students for positive academic and social behaviors. Our school website will be updated by our Parent Coordinator and Technology teacher to provide a space where families can view events and access links that such as Skedula/Pupil Path to track their children's progress. All teachers will be responsible for updating Skedula/Pupil Path, presenting classroom expectations on Curriculum Night and update families on student progress during Parent Engagement Tuesdays. To promote family health, CoVo will have weekly workout and yoga sessions led by the Principal and Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We strategically aligned funds to support the instructional needs of the school. We participated in the Model Teacher and Lead Teacher Program to build capacity for coaching the staff. The Brain Power Program was purchased to increase student engagement in the classroom as well as to promote physical and mental health for students and their families. We purchased technology and software programs such as I-Ready, Max Scholar and Imagine Learning to support differentiation and grouping. We built in data periods into our daily schedule, and utilize bi-weekly Monday 80-minute professional development for Data Inquiry. Teacher and supervisor per session funding will be utilized for after school Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday classes to address the academic needs of students performing below grade level. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of the teachers would have strategically used data to target instruction in order to create flexible groups and provide students' access to CCLS aligned curriculum using multiple entry points, evidenced by revised lesson/unit plans along with growth from 1st benchmark assessment to the 2nd benchmark assessment. The I-Ready program will have three diagnostic dates (October, January, and March) throughout the year to provide teachers with information to form groups in the classrooms. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 6  I-Ready  Benchmark Assessments  DRP   NYS Performance Tasks  NYS Performance Series  I-Ready Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? A strength in this area is that the school is dedicated to cultivating an inclusive environment where students voices are heard and they are able to develop their academic skills, strengths, and talents. The school cultivates the development of an overarching system and partnership that supports and sustain social and emotional development health by incorporating the following: Positive Behavioral and Intervention Support (PBIS) program (CoVo Cash Dollars are rewarded through the PBIS Rewards App that students can trade in for rewards), Behavior Coordination Team (review teacher referrals on a case by case basis to provide interventions and next steps to address students’ academic and social and emotional needs with a plan of action), our grade team “Kid Talk” protocol (designed for grade teams to engage in collaborative dialogue about individual students that may be struggling academically or emotionally), and student council. We also have a partnership with community based agencies who support our work with targeted students. A priority area of focus is to provide and maintain a safe and nurturing environment. According to the Framework for Great Schools Report, only 72% of our students responded positively to questions around supportive environment; in addition, only 68% of our students feel safe while they are in the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of our teachers will effectively implement school culture programs (PBIS, morning Meeting, advisory) with fidelity, evidenced by a 10% increase in students responding positively to questions about supportive environment based on feedback from the 2016-2017 Learning Environment survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance, Deans, Social Worker, and PBIS team Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: All teachers August 2018-June 2019 1. The Student Government will conduct a monthly survey in order to assess students' views around safety in the school. 2. Advisory Teachers will implement "morning meetings" (based on Responsive Classrooms) in order to build strong sense of community 3. The PBIS Team will monitor and track the distribution of C.H.E.E.R.S as incentives to promote positive behavior in the school. 4. The Behavior Coordination Team (BCT) will have bi-weekly meetings and develop action plans such as soft mentoring (check-in programs), conduct sheets for students who have displayed chronic disciplinary issues. 5. Teachers will incorporate cooperative learning protocols into their classroom routines in order to improve students' abilities to work together. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups All teachers and students August 2018- June 2019 1. Identify at-risk students at the grade team meeting using data from the “Kid Talk” protocol and referred to the BCT team in order to create next steps ranging from behavior plan, AIS Principal, Assistant Principal, BCT (Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Dean and Community Coordinator), Learning Leaders 9  support, recommended services, to a referral to our community based agency. 2. Participate in advisory designed to promote team building, self-esteem, character education, as well as, for cohorts of students to be known very well by at least on adult. 4. During the second grade team meeting of each month, all teachers will focus on creating an inclusive school environment to meet the needs of diverse learners. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement 1. BCT communicates and supports the parents with the services that the school is recommending for students. 2. Use parent engagement Tuesdays to conference with parents about their child’s progress 3. The parent coordinator will create a family "Suggestion/Comment Box" where by families can anonymously submit questions, comments and recommendations on how to improve the school. Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust 1. CoVo's Incentive Based Reward System that encourages teachers to reward positive behavior in the school's environment. 2. Advisory 3. Grade Team “Kid Talk” protocol 4. Behavior Coordination Team referral system 5. A "Soft" contract with staff, parents and students on language Code of conduct/Standard of Behavior 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents and students August 2018 – June 2019 All teachers and students August 2018– June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, BCT (Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Dean and Community Coordinator) and Parent Coordinator, Learning Leaders Principal, Assistant Principal, BCT (Social Worker, Guidance Counselor, Dean and Community Coordinator) and Parent Coordinator, Learning Leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. BCT communicates and supports the parents with the services that the school is recommending for students. Use parent engagement Tuesdays to conference with parents about their child’s progress.The parent coordinator will 0  create a family "Suggestion/Comment Box" where by families can anonymously submit questions, comments and recommendations on how to improve the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We strategically aligned funds to support the instructional needs of the school. This is evident by setting aside Per session for summer planning of PBIS workshop; and an advisory curriculum. Human resources include: scheduling time for teachers to meet in grade teams, and for the Behavior Coordination Team to meet bi-weekly; scheduling time for Advisory in students’ programs, and providing training for teachers on Advisory. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 students will improve 2 proficiency levels as measured by the i-Ready Benchmark assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  i-Ready benchmarks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According the Framework for Great Schools, a strength is that teachers are having dialogue about classroom instruction and school community. In addition, teachers are collaborating in order to design instructional programs together and making a conscious effort to coordinate their teaching with instruction at other grade levels. However, based on our New York State Assessment scores, in particular with respect to how students performed on open-ended responses, our area of growth is to strengthen teachers' pedagogy to differentiate and provide multiple entry points in order for students to access to the curricula. In addition, teachers will work together to implement strategies used to meet individual learning needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 90% of our teachers will participate in professional learning communities to share, revise and adapt instructional techniques that promote high levels of student engagement and inquiry as measured by them achieving an effective rating for component 3c. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Teachers 1. Teacher Teams focus on developing lesson plans that reflect multiple entry points 2. Teacher Teams will work together to study and implement various strategies to support all learners 3. Teacher Teams will continue to look at student work in order to make adjustments to units/lessons 4. Teacher Teams will engage in collective inquiry in order to build shared knowledge, which, in turn, will allow them to make more informed decisions about teaching and learning. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): ELLs and Students with Disabilities September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, and teacher teams 1. Students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-need student subgroups will be able to close the achievement gap because teacher teams will adapt instructional techniques that are suitable for them. 2. The inter-visitation cycle will allow teachers to observe strategies being used by other teachers in order revise and/or 3 adapt their lesson/unit plans that will support SWDs, ELLs and other high-need student subgroup. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement: 1. The school staff will provide parents with clear explanations about the specific knowledge, skills, and dispositions students will be expected to acquire in every course. 2. The school staff will articulate the progress of students in the classroom through Parent-Teacher conferences, Parent Engagement Tuesdays, Skedula, and academic celebrations. 3. The school staff will create an annual survey of randon sampling of parents and community members, create focus-group meetings and/or attending community board meetings. Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust: 1. Time for teachers to meet in professional learning communities 2. Read texts such as "Fear as a Catalyst for Change," and using Kotter's Staircase of Change as a guide 3. Time for teachers to interact with students' data 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers and parents September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, and Parent Coordinator All teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, and Teacher Leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high-need student subgroups will be provided with customized instruction to meet their learning needs (ie. strategic reading blocks, Mathletics and I-ready technology programs) ELL, Students with disabilities, At-risk students August 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16. Teacher Teams will work closely with the IEP teacher and the ESL teacher in order to provide targeted groups with scaffolds such as visual aids, tiered tasks and sentence starters to assist with discussion. Teacher lesson plans will incorporate multiple entry points for English Language Learners and students with disabilities aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We strategically aligned funds to support the instructional needs of the school, evidenced by: scheduling time for teachers to meet in inquiry teams during 80 minute professional development; providing an administrative period specifically for data tracking; providing teachers with a Peer instructional Coach and assistant principal to support data inquiry work; per session for before/after school planning with teacher leaders and administration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 4  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of the teachers will increase one level for Component 3C (Engaging Students in Learning) on the Danielson's Framework for Teaching. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Ratings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. CoVo school leaders use both informal and formal observations, learning walks, and individual teacher conferences to monitor instructional practices and support teachers in multiple ways to improve their professional growth and as a result, according to the 2017-2018 New York State Scores, Community Voices Middle School made 13% progress in grade level performance in ELA and 6% progress in grade level performance in Math. However, looking at the State scores, we need to strengthen consistency across classrooms to improve individual and school-wide practices in using the data to make instructional decisions that impact student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will monitor the improvement of teachers’ practice to use assessment in instruction (3D), in order to scaffold, differentiate and track students’ progress, resulting in 90% of teachers moving a minimum of one level in component 3d of the Danielson's Framework for Teaching in the Advance Rating System. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: ELLs and Students with disabilities September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal 1. Use data collected from the focused walk through to design individualized professional development aligned to teacher needs. 2. Professional development team will design on-going differentiated professional development workshops that address areas that need improvement based on data from walk throughs. 3. Use of Danielson Framework for Teaching to provide specific individual and whole group feedback. 4. Administrator will use elements from Instructional Rounds by Elizabeth City and Richard Elmore to improve our focused walkthroughs. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH): 1. Focus walkthroughs will result in improved pedagogy resulting in a supportive environment for ELLs and Students with disabilities. 2. Provide teachers with feedback and support for creating multiple entry points for ELLs and students with disabilities. 3. Track progress of teacher practices based on student data Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement: 1. Communicate student progress as a result of improved teacher pedagogy with parents during PTA meetings, on the school website, through school messenger and backpack notices, Curriculum Night, Skedula, and the monthly school calendar. ELLs and Students with disabilities September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal Teachers and Parents September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal 7 2. Articulate the progress of students in the classroom through Parent-Teacher conferences, Parent Engagement Tuesdays, Skedula, and academic celebrations. Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust: All teachers 1. Focused Walkthroughs include teacher leaders so that we are able to build teacher capacity 2. Instructional cabinet and the professional development team will work collaboratively to develop and turn-key professional development. 3. Teachers are receptive to feedback from administrators and will implement feedback given. September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal and teacher leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Communicate student progress as a result of improved teacher pedagogy with parents during PTA meetings, on the school website, through school messenger and backpack notices, Curriculum Night, Skedula, and the monthly school calendar. Articulate the progress of students in the classroom through Parent-Teacher conferences, Parent Engagement Tuesdays, Skedula, and academic celebrations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The resources needed to maintain and nurture teacher development are: funding for teacher leaders; per diem to allow teacher leaders to participate in focused walkthroughs; funding for a Peer Instructional Coach through the New York City Teacher Incentive Fund; an ELA/Math consultant to support literacy across the content areas; programming time for teachers to meet with school leaders to engage in professional conversations around instruction; additional per session for before/after school planning for professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will monitor the improvement of teachers’ practice to use assessment in instruction (3D), in order to scaffold, differentiate and track students’ progress, resulting in 70% of teachers moving a minimum of one level in component 3d of the Danielson's Framework for Teaching in the Advance Rating System. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 8  Advance Ratings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey, Community Voices Middle School, moved from 75% (2016-2017) to 86% in positive responses to Strong Family and Community Ties. Our parents say that we communicate with parents about how they can help their children learn. To accomplish this, we use Tuesday parent engagement time to reach out to parents, Skedula (our online grading system), Parent Teacher conferences, our school website, school messenger, and through our Parent Coordinator and PTA workshops. Yet, parent participation at academic/instructional and cultural events, continues to be a struggle for our school. Our key focus is to increase parent attendance at school-wide events by 15%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase parent involvement and engagement by 15%, measured by attendance at academic events, events that focus on the social and emotional needs of our students, and events that promote school spirit. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Research-based instructional programs , professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change: Parents September 2018-June 2019 Principal and Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Learning Leaders 1. Teachers and Administrators will work to implement Student Led Conferences as a way to increase parent participation aligned to student achievement 2.Teachers will use Tuesday parent engagement time to personally invite parents to school-wide events 3. The parent coordinator will post new events on the school website/ social media in a timely manner so that parents can plan accordingly to attend events and workshops 4. The parent coordinator along with the principal will work together the School Leadership Team and PTA to use various strategies to increase parent participation Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups: Parents September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Parent Coordinator, Learning Leaders Provide workshops for parents of students with disabilities and ELLs to support their academic progress. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement: 1. The parent coordinator will communicate and support the parents with relevant information needed in order to increase participation at events via weekly school messenger, monthly calendars, and the school's website. 2. The parents are encouraged to check Skedula to keep abreast with students’ academic and behavioral progress Parents and teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Parent Coordinator, Learning Leaders 1 3. Teachers will use parent engagement Tuesdays to conference with parents about their child’s progress and include information about school-wide events. 4. The PTA will recognize the parents of students who were never absent/late each month 5. Translations service will be offered to welcome and assist parents Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust 1. Parent Coordinator elicits feedback from parents about ways to increase parent engagement. 2. Increase positive communication with parents and the school with the addition of bi-weekly positive Tuesday parent engagement. 3. "How are we doing" mid-year survey to be complete in January. 4. Monthly Breakfast with the Administrative Team Parents and teachers September 2018- June 2019 Principal and Parent Coordinator, Learning Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources needed to support this action plan include: per session opportunities for staff to engage with parents; parent coordinator scheduling event; paper and ink to promote events; school messenger and school website; PBIS Rewards App; and Skedula. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 parent participation at school-wide events will increase by 10% as evidenced by attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2   Sign in sheets for school events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Performance levels on the New York State ELA assessment Mathematics Performance levels on the New York State Math assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ELA tutoring ELA tutoring Before/ after school Push-in/Pull-out Push-in/Pull-out School day Word Generation Strategic Reading Program Computer based Program During the day, afterschool Tutoring; Computer based program Saturdays Small Group (<16) KLJPhonicsReading Program Saturday Academy – iReady test preparation Math tutoring Computer based Program Math tutoring Afterschool2x per week Saturdays Before/ after school Push-in/Pull-out Push-in/Pull-out School day Mathletics Program Saturday Academy – iReady test preparation Computer based Program School day, after school Tutoring; Computer based program Saturdays Regents Preparation 4  Science Class assessments are below 65% Tutoring Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Class assessments are below 65% BCT referral from Kid Talk Regents Preparation Tutoring At-risk counseling and/or Referral to outside agency Small Group Small group instruction Small group Small group instruction One to one or group After schools, Saturdays After school After school After school School day 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 55 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide STH population with instructional resources and materials, school uniform, as well as before and after school instructional support. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Attend hiring fairs; Identify and recruit highly qualified teachers in all content areas; Principal and secretary will work closely with the network HR person to ensure that all non-highly qualified teachers will meet all required documents and assessment deadlines; Mentors will be assigned to support struggling and unqualified teachers; Send teachers to outside professional development to strengthen teacher practice; Collaboration with local colleges; Formal and informal observation to provide formative feedback and track teacher development; Administrators met with teachers in September and October to develop individual goals for the school year 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Promote and facilitate CCLS aligned student work that reflects the implementation of current system-wide reform Initiatives; Provide job embedded professional development for staff regarding teacher effectiveness; and Use funds to hire curriculum specialist and consultants to work staff in developing engaging and rigorous instruction and curriculum Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 8  n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The UFT chapter leader selects four teachers and the principal selects four teachers to participate on our school local Measure committee. The team consists of special education teachers, department specific teachers, and administrators. The committee meets at the beginning of the year and works collaboratively to make recommendations for teacher-level local measures. Once selections are made, the committee provides professional development to the entire staff. In addition, every department has a teacher leader who serves on the school's Instructional Cabinet. The members on the Instructional Cabinet work together to create the school's professional learning plan based on feedback from their respective departments and walkthroughs/ observations. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 170,680 X 9  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 2,689,155 n/a n/a X n/a Section 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-0  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Community Voices Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Community Voices Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 3  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Community Voices Middle School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 4  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 5  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 6  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 7  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 29 School Name Community Voices Middle School Borough Queens School Number 356 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ryan T. Branch Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Arline DiBenedetto Teacher/Subject Area A. Felts/ELA Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider S. Valenza Superintendent Beverly Mitchell Assistant Principal Claudette Hanson Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent N/A Parent Coordinator C. Folds Field Support Center Staff Member J. Metz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 313 9 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.99%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used to assess early literacy skills of our ELLs include the NYSITELL, Spanish LAB, ESL Periodic Assesssment, and ELA Pre-assessments. We also use Teacher Made Common Assessments to assess the students learning in the classroom. According to the data, 40% of our ELLs scored Level 1 and 60% of ELLs scored Level 2 on ELA Pre-Assessment given at the beginning of the school year. Based on the results, our school's instrctional plan will focus on strengthening the areas of their needs: reading comprehension, summarizing, inferencing, and writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Our ENL teacher meets with the instructional cabinet bi-weekly to provide next steps for ELLs to the department leaders. Additionally, staff members have been trained to utilize the data provided by the Imagine Learning Program. 0  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Formative assessments comprises the ongoing checks that the ENL teacher makes to determine if the students are acquiring the knowledge and skills that are the objectives of the unit. The ENL teacher will utilize the information to adjust the focus of forthcoming instruction. Identifies the student’s current knowledge/skills and the necessary steps for reaching the desired goals. Formative assessments are in various forms; exit slips, running records, surveys and questioning. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? During teacher team meetings, teachers are provided with Imagine Learning data that identifies the grade level for ELLs for areas such as reading comprehension, summarizing, etc. Teachers use this data to plan differentiated activities in the classroom. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the data patterns shown on the results of the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT, we are able to conclude that across students' proficiency levels and grade levels, we find lower grades in the R/W modalities among our students. While there is a high possibility of receiving a perfect score on the L/S section, students struggle the most in Writing section of the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers use the data gathered to plan for future instruction, and administrators use the data for decision-makingpurposes to determine the extent to which students have acquired essential knowledge and skills for a particular unit. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Integrated ENL: The ENL teacher will provide support in the ELLs content classes (ELA/SS). Depending on the proficiency level of the ELL, the ENL teacher will provide 180 minutes or 90 minutes of services through the Integrated ENL instruction. While the general ed teacher works with the class, the ENL teacher will provide small group instruction for guided practice with scaffolding strategies for support. The general ed teacher will share the week's lesson plan and supplement materials with the ENL teacher and the ENL teacher will make adjustments and modifications to meet the needs of all ELLs.Standalone ENL: During standalone ENL instruction, ELLs will focus on enhancing and mastering skills necessary to succeed in other content classes (Ex. Inferencing, Summarizing, etc.) The ENL teacher will provide extra support if the ELLs needs help with the work from their content classes. When ELLs are pulled out for standalone ENL instruction, ELLs will also work on vocabulary, grammar, and other basic feature of the English language through various topics in content subjects. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 1  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering/Emerging: ELLs receive 360 minutes of instruction per week (180 minutes of Integrated ENL Instruction & 180 minutes of Standalone ENL Instruction) Transitioning/Expanding: ELLs receive 180 minutes of instruction per week (90/90 minutes Integrated ENL/Standalone ENL instruction for Transitioning or 180 minutes of Integrated ENL for Transitioning and Expanding) Commanding: ELLs receive 90 minutes of instruction per week (90 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction) * The ENL teacher will push into the ELLs ELA and content subjects to provide support for English language in their content classes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher will push into the ELLs content classes (ELA, SS, Science, and Math) and provide the necessary language support using ESL methodologies. ENL teacher will collaborate with the General Ed content teachers to review the week's lesson plan, make necessary adjustments on the activities and provide small-group instruction and one-to-one instruction to the ELLs using the supplemental materials to support learning.. All of the general ed content class lessons are aligned to the CCLS and the ENL teacher will create/use graphic organizers, supplement resources, to help ELLs understand the concepts and topics learned in the classes. Challenging concepts are diagrammed , supported with pictures. Modeling the steps of a process or showing students a finished product allows for conceptualizing the learning objective. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We assess ELLs' home language through the Spanish LAB and conversation between ELLs and school staff members in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE: SIFE students receive extended instruction time, offered through after school classes or tutoring. Small-group work enhances participation and teacher assessment. Teachers review student performance data on a regular basis and design units of study to meet the diverse needs of our SIFE students with the collaboration of the ENL teacher, while targeting grade level/course standards. Extended day support and one-on-one tutoring is provided to students who require additional support to meet the standards.b. Newcomer: The school provides the following resources to facilitate the transition of Newcomers:- A buddy system identifying a similar student in his/her class who will assist the Newcomer during the day- An orientation session for incoming new students.- Encourage students to participate in academic intervention programs such as AIS and after school programs.c. Developing: The instruction plan implemented for developing ELLs is one that will allow them to demonstrate growth in the acquisition of the second language, make annual progress in their state ELA and math exams, and achieve academically in all of their content classes. All teachers of the ELLs must collaborate with one another to address the language needs of the ELLs in their lessons.- ELA and other content area teachers monitor the understanding of linguistically challenging materials and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms to clarify the meaning. Opportunities for classroom discourse and interaction that are well-designed to enable ELLs to develop communicative strengths in language arts.- Math teachers support students in understanding difficult word problems and require students to make verbal explanations of the problems. Identify key phrases or new vocabulary to pre-teach. This strategy will help students decide which math function they should apply.- Social Studies teachers scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as maps, atlas, and illustrations to increase comprehension.d. Long Term ELLs: The instruction plan implemented for Long Term ELLs is to help them score Commanding on the NYSESLAT and adjust to general education class setting. Students will make annual progress in their State ELA and math 2  exams and achieve academically in all of their content classes. e. Former ELLs: The ENL teacher will provide services to the former ELLs in their content classes for smooth transition into the mainstream general education instruction. * All ELLs and Former ELLs will receive extended time on all formative and summative assessments. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL-SWDs are pulled out of their self-contained Special Education classroom for ENL mandated minutes. The ENL class is comprised of all our ELLs, allowing interaction and socialization and academic exchanges between our ELL-SWDs and our General Ed. ELLs. This curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility allows us to meet the diverse needs of all our ELLs. All lessons are created and design using grade appropriate text, meeting the grade-appropriate ELA and language CCLS standards. ALL Teachers of ELL-SWD use differentiated instruction by tiering lessons on multiple levels to meet the needs of the student's disbility. Additionally, teachers use instructional resources and methods such as leveled readers, verbal check-ins, sentence starters, media clips, modified worksheets, graphic organizers, preferential seating and various forms of technology such as the computes and iPads with online dictionaries, reading systems, etc. Formative assessments and mixed leveled grouping are used to ensure that the academic content is accessible to all learners. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The teachers review the student's IEP and ensure that all services mandated as well as all ENL instruction are provided to the student as it is stated on their IEP. ELL-SWD's whose IEP mandates bilingual instruction receive an alternate placement of a bilingual paraprofessional to support the student during the academic instructions in their native language. Also, some of our ELL-SWDs are pulled out of their self-contained Special Education classroom for ENL standalone instruction. The ENL class is comprised of all our ELLs, allowing interaction, socialization, and academic exchanges between our ELL-SWDs and our General Ed ELLs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention Programs for ELLs (AIS)Targeted Academic Intervention Services are provided to students during school hours and after school. ELLs are also given small group instruction during Standalone ENL instruction as well as Integrated ENL instruction. ELLs are offered academic intervention services in ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? As per new CR Part 154.2 regulations, our ELLs will receive instruction through two ways: Integrated ENL Instruction and Standalone ENL Instruction. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are included in all programs offered to every student in our school, both during and after school (clubs, after school programs, sports, etc). Posters and fliers inviting all students are written in different languages and made visible in hallways and given out while they are in their homeroom. All students have access to the Sports & Arts program that allows students to display their creativity and social skills after school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials include technology such as the SmartBoard, computers, and iPads. As a supplemental computer program, Imagine Learning provides targeted instruction within an individualized learning path that continually adjusts to ELLs 3  needs. The online program activities teach critical language and literacy concepts such as reading and listening comprehension, basic vocabulary, academic language, grammar, phonological awareness, phonics, and fluency. There are also translation dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, bilingual text, and visual aids text in classrooms for ELLs to use during the lesson. ELL subgroups will be created according to their proficiency levels and if necessary, ELLs will be seated next to another student that is proficient in the student's home language for additional translation support. Also, in general ed content class such as science, social studies, and ELA, translated dictionaries, technology are also available to the ELLs. (If it's available, a novel in student's home language will be provided to the ELL.) 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language Support: ENL instruction is conducted in English with references made in Haitian Creole, Spanish, French and Arabic as needed when differentiating word definitions and utilizing context clues. Native Language support is given in the form of peer interaction and by the use of bilingual dictionaries and online translation services. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. During standalone ENL instruction, ELLs are group according to their grade levels and all lesson materials (reading, topic, concepts, etc.) are grade-appropriate and meeting the CCLS. As for the ELL-SWDs, they are given the same lesson materials with modifications to meet the needs and services as they are stated on their IEPs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials include technology such as the SmartBoard, computers, and iPads. There are also translation dictionaries, bilingual glossaries, bilingual text, and visual aids text in classrooms for ELLs to use during the lesson. ELL subgroups will be created according to their proficiency levels and if necessary, ELLs will be seated next to another student that is proficient in the student's home language for additional translation support. Also, in general ed content class such as science, social studies, and ELA, translated and simplified version of the texts are also available to the ELLs. (If it's available, a novel in student's home language will be provided to the ELL.) 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The parent coordinator works closely with parents to facilitate a positive home-school relationship for all students including the ELLs. Even before the first day of school in September, information will be provided to parents both in English and native language ro ensure effective communication and parent involvement. New ELLs and parents will be invited to come to the school to meet the administrators and learn about the programs and activities that are offered in our school. Also, during the school year, when there is a new ELL, we make sure to allow new ELLs to form a positive relationships with the other ELLs by working on a cultural projects together. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer a Spanish Elective to our ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 4  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Please see below question #4 for a response. Please see below question #4 for a response. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Please see below question #4 for a response. All school Personnel receives Professional Development to help work with ELLs. At the workshop, they are instructed on how to focus on best practices, Language Acquisition Stages and their role as a content/language teacher. We are kept up to date on workshops and other offerings through the Department of English Language Learners. At our Network meeting, Parent Coordinator learn how to work with ELL parents and ways to help them. Our ENL teacher, Mrs. DiBenedetto participates in Webinars and attends workshops in order to always be aware of new mandates and acquire new strategies to help our ELLs. Our Principal and Assistant Principals are invited to network meetings and are given PDs on new mandates, and grants/workshops for their school to help ELLs achieve proficiency and academic growth. OT, Speech, PT, School Psychologists are also afforded PD from our network support staff- special ed and ESL specialists work with the providers to understand the needs of and the difficulties our ELLs face. Our staff meets regularly. Any ESL information is brough forth at these meetings to inform our staff and appropriate departments of new initiatives for ELLs. Mrs. DiBenedetto, our ENL teacher, also shares information about the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, the Spanish LAB, and the DOE regulations and mandates regarding the ELLs. The different ATS reports associated with the ELLs, such as the RLAT, RNMR, RYOS, parental survey forms, home language identification survey, program selection form, entitlement letters, and more are all presented and clarified to the other school staffs. In addition, she also shares different ENL teaching methodologies to help the content area teachers support the ELLs in their classes. All of our faculty meetings, grade team meetings, and department meetings always highlight the Common Core Learning Standards, especially emphasizing on Danielson's Framework Domains 1-4. In order to support our staff with assisting ELLs as they transition to High school, we work with the guidance counselor to understand the difficulties our ELLs might face in a large urban high school. The guidance counselor would select and recommend a few high schools that would best be suitable for our ELLs and direct the students in that direction. As per CR Part 154.2, total 15% of PD hours for all teachers and 50% of ELL specific PDs for ENL teacher will be provided through our network supporting staffs. At each PD sessions, an attendance will be taken and the record will be kept in file. Off site PD's agenda copies are kept on file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Please see below question #2 for a response. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Please see below question #6 for a response. 5  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ryan T. Branch, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Community Voices Middle School School DBN: 29Q356 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ryan Branch Title Principal Claudette Hanson Assistant Principal C. Folds Parent Coordinator Arline Dibenedetto ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A A. Felts Parent Teacher/Subject Area S. Valenza Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Beverly Mitchell Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 N/A 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 9  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents 0  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 1 
