 24Q530 School Name: INTERNATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL AT LAGUARDIA COMMUNITY COLLEGE Principal: JACLYN VALANE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information International High School at LaGuardiaCommunity College 342400011530 9-12 School Number (DBN): 24Q530 45-35 Van Dam Street, Long Island City, New York 11101 718-392-3433 Phone Number: 718-392-3443 Fax: Jaclyn Valane Jvalane@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jaclyn Valane Betty Frank Maria Farro ZarahVinola Maria Farro ValentinaArias Steven Vargas N/A District Information Geographical District: 24 Superintendent’s Office Address: Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Room 508, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Kpelles@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5181 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jaclyn Valane Betty Frank Maria Farro N/A Gloria Mero ValentinaArias Steven Vargas N/A Marysol Hinojosa Towhida Parvin Omar Betancourt *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent Member/Elected Parent   ZarahVinola RuthOrlowicz HarrySchutz Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ElectedUFT Member/ElectedUFT Member/ElectedCSA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to enable each of our students to develop the linguistic, cognitive and cultural skills necessary for success in high school, college and beyond. Students have the opportunity to maintain and further develop their native language through native language arts coursework, peer mediated instructional activities, and instructional materials and textbooks in their native languages.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The International High School at LaGuardia Community College offers a multicultural environment for recent arrivals, serving the needs of students with varying degrees of limited English proficiency. A collaborative project between the New York City Department of Education and LaGuardia Community College of the City University of New York, this school offers a high school/college curriculum combining substantive study of all subject matter with intensive study and reinforcement of English. The interdisciplinary curriculum in all teams is structured to provide for a balance of exposure to humanities and mathematics/science/technology. Different disciplines are viewed as interacting, reinforcing and broadening a student's perspective. Reading and writing are infused throughout the entire instructional program to ensure language acquisition and support content area instruction. All classes in each institute are heterogeneous, i.e., students are not grouped according to language level in English, literacy in native language, achievement level, or age. The school year is programmed on an annual schedule, with the exception of college classes which follow the college semester schedule. Students stay with the same teachers for two years. Classroom projects are designed to explore interdisciplinary themes and structured for both collaborative and individual work. Instructional teams are given a portion of funds allocated to the school to purchase texts and libraries, which support the curricular goals of the teams. It is rare that an entire class will use one textbook. Our expectation is that our graduates will be able to work in depth both collaboratively and independently using a wide variety of sources. Teachers provide multiple assessment opportunities. Over the 2018-2019 year all resources will continue to be used to support our interdisciplinary learning curriculum model. We are a Title I School-wide program and all funding is used to provide direct instruction and support services for our students. Performance driven budgeting allows teams to assess at a grassroots level what is needed and allocate resources to quickly support those needs. All teachers provide English and native language development through the content area of their instructional program. As students acquire English, they maintain and develop their native language and all students receive the benefits of all the programs and grants. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The International High School at LaGuardia Community College gives priority to students of limited English proficiency, who have been in the United States for fewer than four years at the time of application. All of our students enter as English language learners. They come from 47 countries and speak 37 different native languages. In order to meet our ELL students’ specific needs of language acquisition we are committed to the following educational principles: 1. Limited English proficient students require the ability to understand, speak, read, and write English with near-native fluency to realize their full potential within an English-speaking society. 0  2. In an increasingly interdependent world, fluency in a language other than English must be viewed as a resource for the student, the school, and the society. 3. Language skills are most effectively learned in context and emerge most naturally in purposeful, language-rich, interdisciplinary study. 4. The most successful educational programs are those that emphasize high expectations coupled with effective support systems, as mirrored in our portfolio presentation requirement for graduation. 5. Individuals learn best from each other in heterogeneous, collaborative groupings. 6. Career-oriented internships facilitate language acquisition as well as contribute a significant service to the community. 7. The most effective instruction takes place when teachers actively participate in the school decision-making process, including instructional program design, curriculum development and material selection. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The International High School at LaGuardia Community College is a highly successful school serving recently-arrived English language learners. This year we have made the most progress in the framework elements of rigorous instruction and strong family community ties. Teachers have worked in collaborative teacher teams throughout the year in order to develop curricula that focus on student critical thinking skills. During the past 2017-2018 school year, our school wide goal was to improve literacy for overall academic achievement through collaborating on and sharing reading and writing. In our October 30, 2017 and April 13, 2018, PPO an area of celebration was Pedagogy 1.2 which cited a clear relationship between core instructional beliefs and practices across classrooms with a focus on language development in all classes. All classes incorporated reading, writing and analyzing texts with students working in groups on critical thinking tasks. In our most recent School Quality Review on January 15, 2015, an additional strength was in the Quality Review framework element of supportive environment. A finding in our QR was that we have a strong culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, as well as families and provides supports to achieve high expectations. As one of LaGuardia Community College’s Early College high schools all of our students have access to college classes which helps us to move students into becoming collage and career ready. After reviewing feedback from our two PPO's during the 2017-2018 school year an area of focus was School Quality Indicator: 1.1: Curriculum. Specifically, we will work on students asking their own questions for their independent research papers in order to build learner agency. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q530 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 527 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 32 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 11 N/A 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 67.6% % Reduced Lunch 60.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 58.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 12.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 79% 2% 78.4% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 1 1 91.4% 0.4% 3.2% 2.3% 26.6% 0.9% 4 0% 6.4 N/A N/A 9% 1% 88.8% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A YES YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In analyzing the past two years January English Regents constructed response scores for parts 2 and 3 we still a need for continuing improvement in our students writing scores. In January 2018, our students scored a 3.13 out of a possible 6 points on part 2 of the ELA Regents and they scored a 1.94 out of a possible 4 on part 3. After analyzing these results we realized that additional work around writing on demand essays could help our students. As a member of the New York Performance Standards Consortium we believe that focusing on the performance indicators of thesis, organization, analysis and connections will assist our students in their writing and allow them to deepen their incite and understanding of texts. This is why we chose to focus on our literary analysis essay portfolio project for our rigorous instruction goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of June 2019, 89% of our presenting seniors will have passed a rigorous, writing-intensive literary analysis portfolio presentation with a score of competent or higher. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional Development provided by the Internationals' Network for Public Schools (INPS) and outside consultants on using layered curriculum and other differentiation strategies that promote rigorous thinking and writing for students.  Teachers in the English discipline as well as teachers in all subject areas will meet to plan rigorous P-BAT projects that focus on student reading and writing across all disciplines.  Humanities and Math/Science Junior and Senior Institute Teams will meet to discuss, develop and access rigorous PBAT tasks.  SIFE Professional Development for the entire pedagogical staff to address the needs of English language learners and to share best practices for improving the writing of English language learners and students in high need sub-groups. · Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All of the school’s pedagogical staff. All of the school’s pedagogical staff. All of the school’s pedagogical staff. All of the school’s pedagogical staff September 4, 2018 through December 21, 2018. September 4, 2018 through December 21, 2018. September 4, 2018 through June 26, 2019. September 4, 2018 through December 21, 2018. Principal, Assistant Principal, Elected School Teacher Leader. Principal, Assistant Principal, Elected School Leader. Principal, Assistant Principal, Elected School Leader. Principal, Assistant Principal, Elected School Leader, SIFE Coordinator.  Our January staff development day will include workshops on: o Developing strong literary analysis portfolio projects that focus on thesis development, organization, analysis and connections. All school's pedagogical staff January 28, 2019-January 28, 2019. Principal, Assistant Principals, Elected School Leader, Guidance Counselor, Instructional teams. 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  The school will hold workshops to provide parents and families with materials and training to help them work with their children to improve their achievement level in school. At the International High School at LaGuardia Community College, parents are partners in sharing the responsibility for high student performance. (Monthly, September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principals, Team teachers.)  Parents of new students are strongly encouraged to attend the new parent orientation where International HS will make clear to parents all school expectations. (September 2018. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Teacher teams.)  The school will conduct PTA meetings with parents to develop partnerships to address student needs, achievement goals and to inform parents of the Common Core learning standards in addition to the Graduation portfolio requirements of the school. Translators and/or the Translation Unit is available at all parent meetings if needed. (Monthly PTA meetings, September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors).  The instructional team communicates with the parents as early as possible to inform them that their child is in danger of failing a class and also to inform them when students are doing well or improving in class. (October 2018-June 2019; Key personnel responsible: Guidance Counselors, Teacher instructional teams.)  The teachers on the instructional team conduct frequent follow-up with parents on the progress of their students throughout the school year both by telephone and in person. September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers instructional teams.)  The teachers on the instructional teams share the student’s individual support plan with the parent and receive parental input to better help the student. (September 2018, November 2018, March 2019, May 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher instructional teams, Parent Coordinator).  All parents receive daily phone messenger calls if their child is either late or absent from a class. (Daily  September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principals) Instructional Teams will meet with parents of presenting seniors at least once during the school year in order to discuss students’ progress on writing component of portfolio. (September 4, 2018 through December 21, 2018. Key personnel responsible: Instructional team, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Principal, Assistant Principals). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Resources will be leveraged in order to allow teacher’s time to participate in graduate portfolio presentations and to provide valuable feedback to students. ● Resources will be leveraged to allow teacher’s time to have one on one instruction with mentees on their portfolio projects. ● Resources will be leveraged in order to allow teacher’s time to participate in workshops to address the needs of struggling ELL students in writing. ● Resources will be leveraged in order to allow teacher’s time to allow for peer teacher class visits to focus on sharing best practices around portfolio writing projects in the classroom. 5  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By September 28th, 2018, all presenting seniors will have completed a baseline assessment using the NY Performance Standards Consortium Literary Analysis rubric in their English classes. 2. By December 2018, 90% of our teachers will have participated in professional development around developing rigorous PBAT projects that promote reading and writing across disciplines. 3. By October 2018, all instructional teams will have met and created a specific instructional goal based around student reading and writing. 4. By January 2019, all agendas from monthly Discipline Meetings will show that humanities and math/Science Institute team meetings are sharing and discussing reading and writing strategies for projects. 5. By December 2019, 90% of our faculty will have participated in a SIFE professional development focused on improving the writing of English language learners and students with interrupted formal education. Mid-year Review: By February, 2019, 75% of our presenting seniors will have reached the score of at least competent on the NY Performance Standards Consortium Literary Analysis Portfolio Rubric in their formative assessment projects in preparation for their portfolio presentation projects. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 1. The administrative team will use the following specific instruments of measure in order to assess progress: Baseline assessments which students complete in September in their English classes, and NY Performance Standards Consortium's Literary Analysis Portfolio Rubric formative assessment scores for students. Using the baseline assessment scores, at least 75% of presenting seniors will have reached a score of at least competent by the time they are on their second formative assessment in February, 2019. 2. The administrative team will monitor the number of teachers participating in professional development. 3. The administrative team will collect instructional team goals by October 2018. 4. The administrative team will collect and review agendas from humanities and math/science team meetings. 5. The administrative team will collect and review team meeting minutes showing discussion on instructional goals. 6. The administrative team will collect and monitor discipline meeting agendas. 7. The administrative team will monitor faculty attendance. 8. The administrative team will monitor attendance at our SIFE professional development Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As one of CUNY's Early College High Schools we have the ability to enroll our students in college classes at LaGuardia Community College. In analyzing our college course outcomes over the past four years through our Early College Partnership with LaGuardia Community College and CUNY, we have seen that one of our strengths is how well students do when they are scheduled for cohort classes as opposed to being mixed in with the general college population. A cohort class means a group of our students are scheduled for the same section of a college class. We have found that this works best to support strong student outcomes for our English language learners. In order to establish a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged we see the need to both increase our college cohort class offerings and our Early College Advisory classes. Early College Advisory classes help to support our students in their college courses. By scheduling students into more cohort college classes we will then be able to work with the college professors to build a relationship in order to collaboratively support our students in the college classes. In addition, the Early College Advisory class will be scheduled twice per week for all students in these college cohort classes in order to support them and help make them college ready. These Early College Advisory classes will be taught by one of our high school licensed teachers in order to offer students the necessary supports in a safe and nurturing environment to help them achieve success in their college classes and help to build self-esteem and a strong sense of self. In planning what our next steps should be in order to best support our students, we will schedule a monthly meeting with our Early College Liaison at LaGuardia Community College and our guidance committee in order to discuss ways in which we can collaborate with the college professors on supporting our English language learners in cohort classes. This also aligns with our NYC Learning Environment Survey and with what parents, students, and teachers say about the supportive environment. Responses from the Learning Environment Survey were high for supportive environment and our last Quality Review assessed us at a Well Developed for this area. Still, we are focusing on this as a goal in order to build on one of our strengths and to develop it into college in order to support students throughout their start in LaGCC classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will collaborate with our Early College partner LaGuardia Community College, in order to offer our students a minimum of ten cohort classes and support them with an Early College Advisory class in order ensure that 7  a growth target of at least 70% of our students who are enrolled in the ten cohort classes reach an overall pass rate of 75% in each of their classes. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Work with our Early College Coordinator and designated liaisons from our school and LaGuardia Community College to regularly assess/evaluate the effectiveness of the support structures of our program and explore further options for college cohort class opportunities for our students. All students enrolled in the cohort college classes. September 4, 2018 and December 21, 2018. Members of the Early College Committee, Principal, Guidance Counselors, Early College Coordinator, Early College Liaison. ● Students will be assigned to a semester-long Early College Advisory class to support them in college classes through guidance counselor and Early College Coordinator recommendation. ● The principal regular assesses the effectiveness of our program by working with the Early College Coordinator and Early College Committee to oversee the design of professional development related to college readiness and networking with the college to develop more opportunities for our students to be successful in cohort college classes. All student enrolled in the cohort college classes. All pedagogical staff members. September 4, 2018 – June 26, 2019. Principal, Guidance Counselors, Early College Coordinator, Early College Liaison. September 2018 and May 2019. Principal, Guidance Counselors, Early College Coordinator, Early College Liaison. ● Hold two parent meetings throughout the year, one in the fall and one in the spring, to discuss our Early College opportunities for students. All parents. December 2018 and May 2019.  Hold monthly guidance meetings with our school’s Early College Liaison and high school counselors in order to create a plan on how to best provide to meet the needs of our English language learners in cohort classes and Early College Advisory. All students enrolled in the cohort college classes. September 4, 2018-June 26, 2019 Principal, Guidance Counselor, Early College Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Early College Liaison. All guidance counselors, Early College Liaison, and principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 9  At the International High School at LaGuardia Community College parents and family members are viewed as equal partners in their child’s educational experience. As a school for newly arrived immigrants we are aware of our responsibility to deal not only with the academic but also the affective aspects of the life of our student and their families.  The parents of incoming ninth graders are informed about the Early College Program at the new student orientation. (June 2019. Guidance counselors, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator).  Parents of 10th graders are invited to attend a formal Early College Orientation with detailed information regarding the Early College Program. (October 2018. Key personnel responsible: Early College Coordinator, Guidance Counselors).  Parents are provided with workshops on how to fill out college applications as well as college financial aid. (October 2018. Key personnel responsible: Early College Coordinator, Guidance Counselors).  The school will hold informational meetings with parents and families to provide them with information about the school and its programs in languages that parents can understand and also offer training so that they can become partners in helping to make educational decisions in support of their children. (September 2018. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors.)  The school will conduct PTA meetings with parents to develop partnerships to address student needs, achievement goals and to inform parents of the Common Core learning standards in addition to the Graduation portfolio requirements of the school. Translators and/or the Translation Unit is available at all parent meetings if needed. (Monthly PTA meetings, September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors).  Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed.  Parents of new students are strongly encouraged to attend the new parent orientation where International HS will make clear to parents all school expectations. (September 2018-June 2019. Key Personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, teachers on instructional teams).  During our fall and spring open school parent conferences parents are offered the opportunity to meet with lawyers from our CBO partners offering free immigration advice. (September 2018, November 2018, March 2019 and May 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Teacher teams.)  Translators are available at all parent workshops and conferences. (September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible, Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Resources will be leveraged to provide time during the regular school day for the Early College Coordinator, guidance counselors and designated liaisons from our school and from LaGuardia Community College to meet on a weekly basis to evaluate the program and plan for the further support of our students in cohort college classes. ● Resources will be leveraged to provide time during the regular school day for Early College Coordinator to run an Early College Advisory to assist their students with cohort college classes. ● Resources will be leveraged to provide time for our senor institute teachers to attend at least two professional development opportunities related to preparing high school students to become college ready. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By January 2019, the Early College Coordinator will have met with the Guidance Committee four times, during the fall semester, in order to share weekly attendance and monitor the Early Alert system to create student interventions. 2. By January 2019, all students in college cohort classes will have at least 79% attendance in their Early College Advisory classes. 3. By the end of January 2019, the Early College Coordinator will have met with each Senior Institute Instructional team three times in order to share updates on student progress on student cohort classes. Mid-year Review: Be February 2019, we will have run five cohort classes with LaGuardia Community College and at least 70% of our students will have passed these college-level courses with a grade of 75% of higher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Administrative team will use college transcripts for all individual students enrolled in the cohort classes as an instrument of measure to assess progress on this goal. This will show each student's individual progress towards us reaching our growth target of 70% of students scoring at least 75% in the college cohort classes. 2. Administrative team reviews agendas from Guidance Committee meetings. 3. Administrative team will review Guidance Committee meeting agendas where the Early College Coordinator reviews attendance and the college Early Alert System with counselors. 4. Administrative team will review senior institute instructional team meeting agendas and minutes with Early College Coordinator on student progress updates. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A strength in our school is that our interdisciplinary teams of teachers have set times to meet throughout the week and co-plan curriculum. Also, as seen in our Learning Environment Survey, we scored a 4.62 on collaborative teachers. Additionally, our last Quality Review assessed us as Well Developed in this area. However, upon analysis we have found that an area in need of growth is aligning curriculum across grade levels and within disciplines. Additionally, in reviewing our PPO feedback from the 2017-2018 school year an area of focus was indicator 1.2, building upon the systems and structures in place so that across all classrooms teachers strategies continue to support high levels of student thinking, participation and ownership. Through our work with the New York Performance Standards Consortium, our school is examining learner agency as an area of growth in projects across grade levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 80% of our teacher teams will have met monthly and developed interdisciplinary projects that include at least two different disciplines. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● At least 50% of our discipline teams, which are made up of teachers within the same content area, will schedule monthly meetings with at least one other discipline throughout the school year to develop at least one long-term interdisciplinary project for students. September 2018. All teachers on the instructional teams. ● Interdisciplinary teams, which are made up of teachers across content areas, will meet monthly throughout the year and use protocols where they will share projects based on the New York Performance Standards Consortium project designed rubric in order to align their work across disciplines. All teachers on the instructional teams. September 2018-June 2019. All teachers on various discipline and instructional teams, principal and assistant principals. AllAll teachers on various discipline teams and instructional teams, principal and assistant principals. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At the International High School at LaGuardia Community College parents and family members are viewed as equal partners in their child’s educational experience. In order to engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home:  The school will hold workshops to provide parents and families with materials and training to help them work with their children to improve their achievement level in school. At the International High School at LaGuardia Community College, parents and teachers are partners in sharing the responsibility for high student performance. Monthly. September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers on instructional teams.)  Parents of new students are strongly encouraged to attend the new parent orientation where International HS will make clear to parents all school expectations and also give teachers a chance to hear the expectations of parents. (September 2018. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers on instructional teams.)  Parents are invited to visit their child’s classes in order to see if they can suggest ways to help teachers on their child’s instructional teams to devise a support plan that might better assist the teachers in meeting the individual student’s needs. (September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers on instructional team). 3   The instructional team communicates with the parents as early as possible to inform them that their child is in danger of failing a class and also to inform them when students are doing well or improving in class. (October 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Guidance Counselor, Teachers on instructional team).  Parents are strongly advised to come to school for a conference with the teachers on the instructional team. If the parent cannot attend in person, arrangements are made to hold the conference between parent and teacher by telephone. If needed the Translation Unit is utilized in order to make sure the telephone conference is conducted in the parents’ home language. (September 2018, November 2018, March 2019, May 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers on instructional team.)  The teachers on the instructional team conduct frequent follow-up with parents on the progress of their students throughout the school year both by telephone and in person. (September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers on instructional team).  The parents of all ESL students are invited to meet with their child’s teachers at least a minimum of once each school year at a time other than regular school parent conferences to discuss their child’s individual needs and progress so that they can continue to work together with teachers. (September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers on instructional team.)  The teachers on the instructional teams share the student’s individual support plan with the parent and receive parental input to better help the student. (September 2018, November 2018, March 2019, May 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teachers on instructional team.)  Translators are available at all parent workshops and conferences. (All parent meetings. September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Resources will be leveraged to allow teachers time to meet with their discipline team four times during the school year. ● Resources will be leveraged to allow all teachers the time to meet during the regular school day with their discipline teams to develop a vertically aligned curriculum that builds PBAT skills within their discipline. ● Resources will be leveraged to allow staff members to attend professional development opportunities on PBAT skill development across all grade levels. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded X X Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. In September 2018, at least two disciplines will agree to collaborate on the development of an interdisciplinary project in their classes for their shared students. 2. By January 2019, at least two discipline teams will have met together four times in order to co-design their interdisciplinary project. . 4  3. On January 28, 2019, we will have a school wide professional development on developing interdisciplinary projects and the benefits to English language learners of cross-discipline work. Mid-year Review: By February 2019, at least 40% of our interdisciplinary teams will have met and designed an interdisciplinary project that includes at least two disciplines. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Administrative team will use the NY Performance Standards Consortium discipline-based rubrics as an instrument of measure. They will ensure that at least two different discipline rubrics are utilized in the teachers' interdisciplinary curriculum. 2. Administrative team will review school-wide professional development agendas and attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After analyzing the “Framework for Great Schools” Report for 2016 and the NYC Learning Environment Survey for 2016-2017 our administrative team discussed that a strength in our school is that our administration works collaboratively with our faculty, parents, and students to develop a climate of inclusiveness and to inspire staff and students with a clear vision for student achievement. However, in considering our next steps we looked at areas in the “Framework for Great Schools” that we would like to improve. For example, one area that we need to strengthen is our programs coherence across the school through professional development. As noted in our spring PPO feedback, one area of focus was indicator 1.2 Pedagogy, which cited building on systems and structures across all classrooms to support higher levels of student thinking. We see professional development as a tool we can use to continue to grow as a school in this area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a Steering Committee composed of teacher team leaders, UFT Chapter leader and administration will have co-designed an annual professional development plan where at least 80% of the PD offered throughout the year directly responds to needs that administration and teachers identify within the school. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  A Steering Committee will be formed to assess the professional development plan and to discuss how to survey faculty and collaborate on developing a comprehensive professional development plan. All teachers and administration. September 2018.  The Steering Committee will meet monthly and evaluate the annual professional development plan as well as the instructional needs of the teachers. All teachers and administration. September 2018-June 2019. The Steering Committee will work with the Internationals Network for Public Schools in order to bring in the opportunity for ESL-focused coaching for teachers. All teachers and administration. September 2018-January 2019 The Steering Committee will invite ElevatED Professional Development to come in and offer our teachers a PD that addresses the topics that teachers identify as needing improvement. All teachers and administration. September 2018 Members of the Steering Committee, made up of teacher team leaders, UFT Chapter Chairs and administrators. Members of the Steering Committee, made up of teacher team leaders, UFT Chapter Chair and administrators. Members of the Steering Committee, made up of teacher team leaders, UFT Chapter Chair and administrators. Members of the Steering Committee, made up of teacher team leaders, UFT Chapter Chair and administrator. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents and families will be encouraged to attend monthly PTA meetings and workshops to better understand effective school leadership strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement. (September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator.)  Parents are encouraged to participate in the various school committees such as the Teaching and Learning Committee, Student Life Committee, and the Early College Committee. September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator.) 7   Parents are encouraged to attend the Title I Parent Committee to help determine how the school Title I funds are spent during the school year. September 2018. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator.)  A parent ESL class is offered through our partnership with LaGuardia Community College, enabling many of our parents to learn English. This empowers parents to better work with the school and understand effective school leadership strategies in order to engage their children at home. (September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Teacher instructional team.)  Translators are available at all parent workshops and conferences. (All parent meetings. September 2018-June 2019. Key personnel responsible: Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator.) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will be leveraged to allow per session to be provided for the Steering Committee to meet before /after the regular school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019, the Steering Committee will put together and submit a reflective report for the School Leadership Team. The report will include faculty feedback on the professional development opportunities offered this school year. It will include the initial faculty survey, agenda's from meetings this year and a plan for professional developments for the remainder of the year. The Steering Committee will work with their teams to assess how useful professional development was in the first half of the year and what strategies were implemented in classrooms after being learned in the professional development. Mid-year Review: By February 2019, the Steering Committee will have co-designed a PD plan from September through February that offered at least two professional development learning experiences each month that was a direct result of teacher feedback and input. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. The administrative team will collect and review Steering Committee agenda's and meeting minutes and faculty meeting agendas. 2. The School Leadership Team along with the administrative team will review faculty feedback from the faculty survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A strength of our school community is that we are able to offer our newly-arrived, immigrant students with additional social and emotional supports through our Guidance Counselors and relationships with community organizations. Over the past six years we have partnered with Western Queens Counseling Center to provide students with mental health screening and counseling opportunities. Now we see the opportunity to provide workshops for parents as well. Western Queens Counseling Center will be able to partner with our guidance committee in order to provide workshops for parents in supporting their children to develop strong self esteem and to stand up as advocates and protectors when they see bullying. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, our Guidance Committee will work with Western Queens Counseling Center in order to provide our PTA with at least two workshops on helping teens to increase their self-esteem to avoid making unhealthy choices and helping students to not become involved in bullying. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Guidance counselors will meet four times per year with All students. October representatives from Western Queens Counseling Center in order to plan upcoming parent workshops. 2018-April 2019.  The PTA board will meet with the parent coordinator and PTA Board. October administration to identify specific workshop topics. 2018-June 2019. Guidance counselors and representatives from Western Queens Counseling Center. Administration and Parent Coordinator. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Western Queens Counseling Center Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Resources are leveraged to provide time during the school day for guidance counselors to meet with representatives from Western Queens Counseling Center.  Resources are leveraged to provide Western Queens Counseling Center a space to meet with parents for workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration and the Guidance Committee will monitor attendance in the workshops and will make outreach to parents before each workshop. By February 2019 we will have had one workshop. 0  Mid-year Review: By February 2019, Western Queens Counseling Center will have provided our PTA with at least one workshop on helping teens to increase their self-esteem. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The administrative team will monitor the parent workshop agenda and sign in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher recommendation and invitation based on class grade. September SIFEwriting sample and teacher recommendation. All students. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Extended Day/Regents Prep/Tutorial services/Portfolio mentoring: Reading, interactive writing, testing strategies and best practices. Saturday Explorer's Literacy Program/Regents Prep: Reading, interactive writing, speaking and experiential activities. Tuesday Seminar: Reading, interactive writing, oral communication and listening skills. Wednesday Seminar: Reading, Interactive writing, oral communication and listening skills. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, which is a small group of students who need targeted intervention meeting with a teacher, and one to one instruction based on student need. Small group literacy activities. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Twice per week during extended day for 50 minutes on Monday's and 55 minutes on Thursday's after the regular school day. Saturday's 9AM -1 PM. Tuesday's 9AM-1 PM. 2  Teacher recommendation based on student need. Enrichment Period: Reading interactive writing, oral communication and listening skills. SAT Prep class: Reading, interactive writing, oral communication and listening skills. All Students. SIFEclass: Building basic literacy skills. Reading, writing, oral communication and listening skills. Small group instruction based on student need. Small group instruction based on student need. Small group instruction based on student need. Small group instruction based on SAT test review material. Wednesday's 11:45 AM -12:35 PM, during the school day. Four days per week for 35 minutes during the school day. One day per week for 60 minutes after regular school day. Small group literacy instruction. 4 days per week for 40 minutes during the regular school day. Counselor recommendation. September SIFEwriting sample, teacher recommendation and SIFEstudent interview. Teacher recommendation and invitation based on class grade. Mathematics Extended Day/tutorial services/Math Portfolio mentoring: Math literacy, Small group and one to one math instruction based on student need. Twice per week during extended for 50 minutes on Monday’s and 55 minutes on 3  SeptemberSIFEwriting sample and teacher recommendation. reading, interactive writing. Saturday Explorer’s Literacy Program: Math literacy, reading, interactive writing, speaking and experiential activities. Tuesday Seminar: Math literacy, reading, interactive writing, oral communication and listening skills. All students. Teacher recommendation based on student need. All students. Wednesday Seminar Math literacy, reading, interactive writing, oral communication and listening skills. Enrichment Period: Math literacy, reading, interactive writing, oral communication and listening skills. SAT Math Review class: Math Literacy, reading, interactive writing, oral communication, problem solving and listening skills. Thursday’s after the regular school day Small group math literacy activities. Saturday’s 9 AM -1 PM. Small group math instruction based on student need. Tuesday’s 9:15-11:45 AM, during the school day. Small group instruction based on student need. Wednesday’s 11:45 AM -12:35 PM, during the school day. 4 days per week for 35 minutes during the school day. 4  Counselor recommendation. Science Teacher recommendation and invitation based on class grade. September SIFE writing sample and teacher recommendation. All students. Small group instruction based on student need. Small group instruction based on Math SAT test materials. Small group and one to one science instruction based on student need. Small group science literacy activities. 1 day per week for 60 minutes after regular school day. Twice per week during extended for 50 minutes on Monday’s and 55 minutes on Thursday’s after the regular school day. Saturday’s 9AM-1PM. Small group science literacy activities. Tuesday’s 9:15-11:45 AM, during the school day. Extended Day/tutorial services/Science Portfolio mentoring: Science literacy, reading, interactive writing. Saturday Explorer’s Literacy Program: Science literacy, reading, interactive writing, speaking and experiential activities. Tuesday Seminar: Science literacy, reading, interactive writing, speaking and experiential science activities. Wednesday Seminar: Science literacy, reading, interactive writing, oral communication and listening skills. 5  Teacher recommendation based on student need. All students. Enrichment Period: Science literacy, reading, interactive writing, oral communication and listening skills. Science Literacy Program: Science literacy, reading, interactive writing, oral communication and listening skills. Social Studies Counselor recommendation and student choice Teacher recommendation and invitation based on class grade. Extended Day/tutorial services/Portfolio research paper: Social Studies literacy, reading, interactive writing, research, oral and listening communication skills. Tuesday Seminar: Small group science instruction based on student need. Wednesday’s 11:45 AM -12:35 PM, during the school day. Small group instruction based on student need. 4 days per week for 35 minutes during the school day Small group science literacy activities. Small group and one to one social studies instruction based on student need. One afternoon per week after school for 60 minutes Twice per week during extended for 50 minutes on Monday’s and 55 minutes on Thursday’s after the regular school day. 6  All students. Social Studies literacy, reading, interactive writing, speaking and listening activities. Wednesday Seminar: Social Studies literacy, reading, interactive writing, speaking and listening activities. Enrichment Period: Social Studies literacy, reading, interactive writing, speaking and listening activities. Saturday Explorer’s Literacy Program: Social Studies literacy, reading, interactive writing, speaking and experiential activities. Teacher recommendation based on student need. All students. September SIFE writing sample and teacher recommendation. Small group social studies literacy activities Small group social studies literacy activities. Small group instruction based on student need. Tuesday’s 9:15-11:45 AM, during the school day. Wednesday’s 11:45 AM-12:35 PM, during the school day. 4 days per week for 35 minutes during the school day. Saturday’s 9AM -1PM. Small group literacy Social Studies activities. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Recommended by teacher and counselor and/or parent. At-risk services Provided by Guidance Counselor: All five teams have one Teacher/Counselor to provide students with One to one and small group counseling activities. Counselors are available to meet with students from 8 AM until 3:30 PM every day. In addition, one crisis 7  at risk services such as counseling for personal, social, emotional and school problems as well as career and college counseling. This represents a student to counselor ratio of 84:1. Guidance Seminar: College advisement, HIV/AIDS curriculum, anti-bullying, grade advisement. Western Queens Counseling Center: Provides therapy for personal, social, emotional and school problems and provides therapy for individuals and family. counselor is on duty each day. Held throughout the day during various class periods. Available by appointment with individual student’s every day. Small group activities. One to one counseling service All students. Recommended by teacher and counselor and/or parent. 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 36 students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. All students who are included in the STH population will receive comparable services to those offered to all other students in the school. This includes free transportation (free metro card). Students in the STH population will receive all of the same educational services as are provided to the rest of the school population. The Title I funds will be used primarily for educational services to ensure that the students in our STH population are able to progress academically. These funds will also be used for our STH population to provide emergency supplies such as uniforms, school supplies, books and eyeglasses. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  In order to recruit highly qualified teachers, we will use the NYC Department of Education’s New Teacher Finder as well as the Open Marker Transfer System. We will form a hiring committee made up of administration and highly qualified teachers in the subject area for which we have the vacancy. Together, the hiring committee will work to screen applicants, hold interviews, schedule demo lessons, and check references.  The International High School at LaGuardia Community College has achieved national prominence. We have been cited for excellence in ELL education by Diane August at the NCLB Conference, by Jim Cummins at TESOL, and by Aida Walqui at the A.A.A.L. Faculty members at the International High School at LaGuardia Community College also teach courses at New York University, Fordham University, Queens College and LaGuardia Community College.  As a school, our doors are always open: We welcome visitors, including many prospective teachers from all over the world. We mentor student teachers from Teachers College, Hunter College, New York University, The New School, Queens College, SUNY New Paltz and The School for International Training in Vermont. In-school mentors are assigned to support new teachers.   All of our new teachers attend staff development workshops for new teachers of ELLs offered by INPS (The Internationals’ Network for Public Schools).  All of our staff members are continually offered multiple opportunities to attend further staff development such as Q-TEL, offered by West Ed., and workshops offered throughout the year by the New York Performance Standards Consortium.  As a member of INPS we participate in the I-START graduate program that trains and places student teachers specialized in English language development for ELLs.  We are offering the following workshops this year to ensure that all of our teachers, both teachers with many years of experience and our new hires, remain highly qualified: o Strategies to support SIFE students to access texts, o SIFE workshop to support our ELL SIFE students, o Project-based interdisciplinary curriculum development, o Creating interdisciplinary strategies to support ELL students, o Differentiation for ELLs, o Experiential education techniques for ELLs, including cooperative learning strategies, o Examining rich tasks and student work in order to assess the work of ELLs, o Curriculum ideas involving movement and role playing to engage ELLs in classroom learning, o Using language acquisition to assist our ELLs in the classroom, 1  o Looking at the work of ELL students through the lens of language acquisition, o Helping teachers to better assist their students with strategies to better prepare them to take the ELA Regents exam, and o Restorative Justice Training to meet the affective needs of our students.  On staff development days, our staff participates in a series of workshops on a variety of topics and strategies to support ELLs through the INPS (The Internationals’ Network for Public Schools).  Teachers and guidance counselors are provided with workshops on graduation requirement in order to better prepare the students in their classes as well as their mentees.  Teachers are invited to attend the Early College Middle College National Consortium (MCNC) Summer Conference to talk about college readiness and discuss strategies to help students close the gap between high school and college.  Teachers visit other Middle College Early College Schools, NYS Performance Standards Consortium Schools, and INPS Schools to learn strategies to help students to become college ready.  Teachers attend professional development with LaGuardia Community College professors in their disciplines regarding curriculum alignment and team teaching strategies.  Teachers attend the Middle College National Consortium’s Winter Conference for leadership training and data analysis. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In order to enable students to meet the Common Core State Standards (CCSS), the International High School at LaGuardia Community College will utilize many strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, administrators and paraprofessionals during the 2018-2019 school year. Our instructional teams, which include teachers and paraprofessionals, meet twice each week to devise strategies and activities to ensure that students are meeting the Common Core Learning Standards. With these Common Core Learning Standards in mind, our instructional teams work on the standard of language and content integration: Our instructional teams work together to create units that help students develop disciplinary and interdisciplinary academic language. Our teams work on the standard of localized autonomy and responsibility by: Developing students’ skills towards the higher levels of the New York State Performance Standards Consortium’s rubric in each discipline area working with students on their personal and academic strengths and weaknesses through projects. In order to assist our teachers and paraprofessionals in supporting our students as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards, we have planned to offer the multiple opportunities for professional development throughout the 2018-2019 school year. These professional development sessions are facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. 1. Collaborative Planning Meetings (Ten meetings planned for year: 9/12/18, 9/26/18, 10/24/18, 11/28/18, 1/12/19, 2/13/19, 3/27/19, 4/17/19, 5/15/19, and 6/5/19).  Sharing unit maps and getting feedback on how to improve opportunities for rigorous writing and reading activities. 2   Sharing syllabus and getting feedback on coherent curriculum throughout the year that builds on portfolio skills.  NY Performance Standards Consortium (NYPSC) Portfolio Rubrics: Continuing to build and assess activities around skills associated with performance indicators. Helping students to understand and use rubrics throughout the year as an assessment tool.  Using baseline and benchmark assessments that are aligned to the Common Core and reflect skills required students to reach Competent or above on the NYPSC rubrics. 2. Engaging Struggling Student in Rigorous Instruction and Activities: (Planned: September 26, 2018)  Developing differentiated adn layered curriculum  Supporting SIFE, IEP and advanced students to access a rigorous curriculum. 3. The Scaffolding Cycle and Supporting Students' Language Acquistion: (Planned: October 8, 2018).  Using the International Network for Public School's (INPS) scaffolding cycle and ESL standards to workshop our curriculum. 4. Promoting Vertical Planning and Assessment for Portfolio-Based Projects (January 28, 2019).  Disciplines identifying skills associated with performance standards on rubric and mapping the grade in which each will be given particular focus and practice in order to meet or exceed standard for a student's final PBAT.  Using Common Core discipline standards to guide and inform decisions about skill mapping for vertical  planning. Sharing baseline and benchmark assessments and getting feedback on how to develop student skills towards higher levels of NYPSC rubric. 5. Language and Content Integration (February 13, 2019).  Teachers will learn and share strategies to support ELL's in acquiring academic English through their study of content. 6. Curriculum Sharing: (Planned for: 9/4/18, 10/3/18, 11/7/18, 12/12/18, 1/30/19, and 3/13/19).  All teachers bring portfolio project task and sample student work to share;  Collect feedback on how well project allowed for students to reach higher levels of the NYPSC rubric, and how the project in the future can be improved to allow for students to reach high levels of the rubric.  Portfolio Project Inter-Rater Reliability;  Norming of projects using New York Performance Standards Consortium rubrics in order to be aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards. Professional development for all staff at The International High School at LaGuardia Community College is geared toward improving ELL academic achievement and language development; we build teacher capacity in these areas by a variety of means: a) Peer observations: Teachers observe each other teach and write reflective letters pinpointing new strategies and techniques they have learned as a result. b) Conferences: Faculty attends a variety of external conferences each year in order to keep abreast of new trends in ESL and their content areas. 3  c) Q-TEL/DELLS trainings: Our classroom teachers are encouraged to complete workshops with QTEL and other DELLSS offerings, which highlight best practices, like scaffolding and differentiation, for working with ELLs in the content areas. d) RFP PD Projects: Small self-selected groups of teachers engage in action research projects throughout the year in order to learn more about specific ESL methodologies and strategies in order to enhance student achievement; all faculty present findings and recommendations to the rest of the staff so that all may benefit from the work of the rest. e) The Internationals' Network for Public Schools New Teacher Summer PD: This two day workshop introduces new International High School teachers to best practices and ESL methodologies. f) Middle College National Consortium Workshops: As a member of the MCNC members of our staff attend workshops and conferences throughout the year on a variety of issues related to helping our ELLs and non-ELL students to become college ready. Over the last few years their workshops have dealt with literacy and numeracy through all discipline studies. During the 2018-19 school, year additional professional development focuses on providing teachers with various instructional strategies for teaching English Language Learners as related to the Common Core Learning Standards. It focuses on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards. These professional development sessions are facilitated by fellow faculty and administrators who are ESL licensed. Planned Timeline: 1. One 1-hour session on differentiating reading and writing activities in order to support all students for project completion. (Planned for: Sept. 18, 2018.) 2. One 1-hour session focusing on interdisciplinary co-planning for teachers on the same day who share the same students. (Planned for: October 23, 2018). 3. One 1-hour session on routines for analyzing text in all content areas. (Planned for: November 27, 2018). 4. One 1-hour session on sharing and obtaining feedback from colleagues on speaking / discussion activities in the classroom that support and writing in the classroom for PBAT completion. (Planned for January 28, 2019). 5. One 2-hour session focusing on developing vertically aligned curriculum using portfolio rubrics and Common Core standards for our ELL students. (Planned for: March 12, 2019). 6. One 1-hour session focusing on leveraging experiential learning to promote rigor and improvements in reading and writing. (Planned: April 16, 2019). 7. One 1-hour session focusing on the use of native language in the classroom to promote English language development. (Planned for May 30, 2019). In addition, our staff will participate in the Internationals Network for Public Schools Professional Development workshops: at several points throughout the year our entire staff will meet with their peers from our sister International High Schools and attend workshops designed specifically for educators of recent immigrant ELL students. Topics will include scaffolding instruction, differentiation of instruction, ESL methodologies, SIFE students, meeting the affective needs of immigrant children, and language development. Other members of our non-teaching 4  staff also take part in many of the above mentioned staff development activities along with teachers as well as their own professional development workshops offered by a variety of sources. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  At the International High School at LaGuardia Community College teachers have a pivotal role in the decision making process. Teachers have multiple, structured ways to have their voices heard throughout the school.  The administration shares data with the teachers on all instructional teams. The administration and teachers on instructional teams go over the data and perform a needs analysis.  The teachers on the instructional team do an inquiry study. From the study, instructional teams of teachers work together and devise strategies to help their individual students.  Based on the inquiry study, teachers on instructional teams develop curriculum tailored to their student’s needs.  Teachers on instructional teams devise individual instructional support plans for students in need.  Teachers share their individual support plans with the other teachers and on their instructional teams. 5   As a member of the NYS Performance Standards Consortium, teachers design their own assessments that are aligned to the NYS Performance Standards Consortium PBAT (Performance-Based Assessment Task) Rubric in their discipline area.  Teachers meet with their discipline members to share their PBAT design as a summative assessment, as well as the formative assessments that are given to students throughout the project.  Teachers participate in the NYS Performance Standards Consortium’s workshops where they norm rubrics and assessment tasks as well as provide feedback to the teachers who wrote the assessment.  Teachers on instructional teams provide each other with feedback on strategies that might best work to help support individual students. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5, Section 6, Section 7, Section 8. x Section 5A-Section 5C, Section 6. x Section 5A-Section 5E, Section 6. Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 268,563.00 0 39,630.00 $0 3,669,671.00 x x x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 6  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. International High School at LaGuardia Community College, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students International High School at LaGuardia Community College, is in compliance and is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between our school and the families. Our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. Our school will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; (CEP Goal 1, Goal 3 and Goal 5)  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; (CEP Goal 1, Goal 3 and Goal 5) 8   fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; (CEP Goal 2, Goal 3, Goal 5)  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; (CEP  Goal 1 and Goal 5) sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; (CEP Goal 1, Goal 2, and Goal 5)  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; (CEP Goal 2, Goal 3, and Goal 5)  At the International High School at LaGuardia Community College, parents are partners in sharing the responsibility for high student performance. ( CEP Goal 1, Goal 3 and Goal 5)  Parents are strongly encouraged to attend the new parent orientation where International HS will make clear to parent all school expectations, inform them of the variety of services we provide to families and the many ways they can participate in the life of our community. (CEP Goal 1, Goal 2 and Goal 5)  The school will conduct periodic meetings with parents to develop partnerships to address student needs, achievement goals and to inform parents of the Common Core learning standards.( CEP Goal 1, Goal 3 and Goal 5)  Parents are invited to visit their child’s classes in order to see if they can suggest ways to help teachers on the child’s instructional teams to devise a support plan that might better assist the teacher to meet the individual student’s needs. Parents and family members are welcome to come into the school at any time. They may sit in on classes and participate in staff development. (CEP Goal 3 and Goal 5)  The instructional team communicates with the parents as early as possible to inform them that their child is in danger of failing a class. Parents are strongly advised to come to school for a conference with the teachers on the instructional team. If the parent cannot attend a meeting in person, arrangements are made to hold a conference between the parent and the teachers on the instructional team by telephone. At this meeting teachers share data regarding the student with the parent. (CEP Goal 1, Goal 2, and Goal 5)  The teachers on the instructional team share the student’s individual support plan with the parent and receive parental input to better help the student.(CEP Goal 1, Goal 2, Goal 3 and Goal 5)  The school holds a PTA workshop in order to familiarize parents with the school’s graduation Requirements.(CEP Goal 1 and Goal 5)  PTA workshops are held to help educate parents regarding the instructional approach including methods of language acquisition utilized at The International High School at LaGuardia Community College.(CEP Goal 1, Goal 3, Goal 4, and Goal 5)  A parent ESL class is offered through our partnership with LaGuardia Community College, enabling many of our parents to learn English. This empowers parents to better support their child at home in their school work. (CEP Goal 1 and Goal 5)  Translators are available at all parent workshops and conferences. (CEP Goal 1, Goal 2, Goal 3, Goal 4, and  Goal 5) In order to further encourage parent involvement the school sends out all letters and correspondence with parents in a variety of languages to meet the needs of our parents. We send out letters in Spanish, Polish, Korean, Chinese, Bengali, Urdu, Russian, Haitian-Creole, and other languages as needed. We also utilize a telephone calling machine to reach out to parents in a variety of languages to meet the needs of our parents. This telephone machine allows us to leave phone messages, emails and text messages in many of the parent’s native languages regarding important school events. (CEP Goal 1, Goal 2, Goal 3. Goal 4, and Goal 5)  All parents receive daily phone messenger calls if their child is either late or absent from a class. If the lateness or absence continues than parents are contacted by phone, email, text message or mail until direct contact has been made. If necessary, the parents are invited in for a conference to discuss their child’s lateness or absences.(CEP Goal 1, Goal 2 and Goal 5)  The teachers on the instructional team conduct frequent follow-up with parents on the progress of their students throughout the school year both by telephone and in person.(CEP Goal 1, Goal 2, Goal 3, Goal 4 and Goal 5)  The parents of new incoming ninth graders are informed about the Early College Program at the new student orientation.(CEP Goal 2 and Goal 5) 9   Parents of 10th graders are invited to attend a formal Early College Orientation with detailed information regarding the Early College Program.(CEP Goal 2 and Goal 5)  Parents are provided with workshops on how to fill out college applications as well as college financial aid. Our parents are all immigrants and generally are uninformed about the college system in the United States so they are provided with detailed information regarding the college system in this country.(CEP Goal 2 and Goal 5)  Translators are available at all of the Early College Parent workshops. (CEP Goal 2, Goal 4, and Goal 5) Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association, as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will: · actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; · engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; · ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; · support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; · maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; · conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; · schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; · translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 0  · conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) The International High School at LaGuardia Community College, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships    conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 1   respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2  volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: All of our ESL teachers participating in the Title III supplemental instructional program are fully licensed. And all of our content area teachers receive more than 10 hours of ESL training annually. All of our supplemental Title III classes are made up of students in two contiguous grades (9th and 10th together, 11th and 12th together) so that instruction is provided at appropriate age and grade levels. In addition students are grouped by heterogeneous language groups, with students working in small, collaborative teams to support each others English and native language development and content area mastery. As students move from beginning to advanced levels of English language acquisition, assignments and material become increasingly more challenging while remaining linguistically and cognitively appropriate. Specific language strategies are used to assist our ELL students in their learning and enhancement of first and second languages including: natural approach; peer mediated instruction; language experience approach; content-based academic language learning approach (CALLA); hands on, student centered, activity based, project driven learning; semantic mapping; total physical response (TPR); multilingual/ multilevel materials; and, the writing process. The International High School at LaGuardia offers students a great deal of home language support. The students' home language is used in each class and Title III program and is not limited to the ESL classroom. Although we follow the general philosophy of the International Network for Public Schools (INPS) that it is best to group students heterogeneously by language within every classroom students also work together within homogeneous language groupings to complete native language assignments and projects throughout various content areas and are also a part of our interdisciplinary approach where students' native languages are fostered, further developed and literary skills are reinforced in both languages. The native language projects go much further than helping students to stay current with their native language but allows them to share not only their cultural heritage but learn about the cultures of their classmates from around the world. Students not only utilize native language glossaries, dictionaries, and materials in their native languages but they also are encouraged to make connections to their native languages in every subject area. Our ESL teachers target students based on their NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results in order to design a complete program of instruction. All of our before and after school Title III programs have a certified ESL teacher working with a teacher licensed in Social Studies, English, Math, Science or Special Education. All records and attendance for the Title III programs are kept on file in the main office. All program notification letters will be sent out in the parents preferred language to meet the needs of the parents. We utilize the DOE Translation Unit to translate letters and materials for parents on the Title III programs. Supplemental Title III Instructional Program: The Title III program provides English Language Learners with supplemental instruction in a Saturday Literacy Program as well as in before and after school programs. The instructional 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information programs will service ELLs in two contiguous grade groupings (9th/10th and 11th/12th) of high school students who score at the Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding levels on the NYSESLAT. In addition, our former ELL's who scored as Commanding will be serviced for up to 2 years after exiting ELL status. Teachers will be paid per session rate. All of our supplemental Title III Instructional programs will have a licensed ESL teacher working directly with the content area teachers to plan curriculum and co-teach the activity. The content area teachers will be licensed in English, Social Studies, Science or Math but will always be working directly with an ESL licensed teacher. Saturday Literacy Explorers' Program: classes will meet on Saturday's for approximately 22 sessions beginning in mid October through mid May, from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 P.M. Approximately thirty students will be served. Group size will be maintained at 15 students per teacher. This class will be targeted to 9th/10th graders who tested at the Entering, Emerging and Transitioning level students. There are seventeen licensed teachers who will rotate in this activity each week, ten ESL teachers and seven content area teachers (3 math certified teacher, 1 Biology certified teacher, 1 Chemistry certified teacher, 1 Social Studies certified teacher and 1 English/Special Education dual certified teacher). Having licensed content area teachers rotate each week to work with an ESL teacher benefits our students by allowing the class to have a truly interdisciplinary curriculum and allows our teachers to prepare students to improve their academic literacy skills across all disciplines. This enables the content area teachers to draw connections between the various disciplines which allow students to see how all of their classes and curriculum tie together. Each week the class will always have two teachers, one certified fully licensed ESL teacher and one certified fully licensed content area teacher in either English, Social Studies, Biology, Chemistry or Math in order to provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Although the content teachers will rotate from week to week there will always be at least one ESL licensed teacher present each week. The rationale: Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy using English acquisition through new vocabulary learning, oral practice through discussions, learning map skills (with NYC land mark and subway system), and cultural/historical exploration, and conduct interview, journal writing during and after the trip. These trips connect to the instructional program by enabling students to develop skills to enhance their speaking, reading, writing and listening skills. These strategies will help students achieve higher scores on the NYSESLAT. Student create a brochure “Places to go in New York City” by the end of the year. For some of the sessions, students first meet a 9 a.m. to do classroom work and go off on trips visiting various museums and land marks in NYC. During other Saturday sessions students will remain in the classroom to prepare for future trips by working on interview questions and interview techniques, using laptops to do research on trip destinations and to plan itineraries for their trips. Student will also spend time in the classroom sharing and revising their journals, creating as well as sharing out their poetry and short stories. The expected dates for the Saturday Explorers' Literacy Program trips are planned for 10/13/18, 10/20/18, 10/27/18, 11/3/18, 11/10/18, 11/17/18, 12/1/18, 12/8/18, 12/15/18, 1/5/19, 1/12/19 in the the Fall semester. During the Fall semester the trips are expected to include, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, The American Museum of Natural History, the Staten Island to create poetry, the Rubin Museum of Art, Candle Making, the Museum of the Moving Image, Central Park, the Mythology walk through NYC. During the spring semester the planned dates are: 2/2/19, 2/9/19, 3/2/19, 3/9/19, 3/23/19, 3/30/19, 4/6/19, 4/13/19, 5/4/19, 5/11/19 and 5/18/19. The trips for the spring semester are still being planned but are expected to include some of the following sites, Ellis Island, Governor's Island, the Cloisters, the Museum of the American Indian, the Holocaust Museum, the Tenement Museum. In addition to 2 teachers, additional instructional materials and additional classroom supplies such as graphing paper and 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information various other art supplies and film for the creation of student journals as well as funds to cover the cost of museum admissions will be purchased to support the Saturday Literacy Explorers Program. Several novels will also be ordered for the class including: Cool Salsa, by Lori M. Carlson (Published by Square Fish), Things Fall Apart, by Chinua Achebe (Published by Random House), Enrique's Journey, by Sonia Nazario (Published: Random House), Breaking Through, by Francisco Jimenez (Publisher: Houghton Mifflin). After school Art and Literacy Workshop: We will work with Urban Arts Partnership to offer an This after school class will meet after school on Wednesday's from 3:30 PM to 5:30 PM. Approximately 100 students will be served. This class will target 9th/10th grade Entering, Emerging and Transitioning level students. The class will have three ESL licensed teachers. The Reading Plus program is tentative scheduled to meet for 24 sessions, 10/17/18, 10/31/18, 11/7/18, 11/14/18, 11/21/18, 11/28/18, 12/5/18, 12/12/18, 12/19/18, 1/9/19, 1/16/19, 2/6/19, 2/13/19, 2/27/19, 3/13/19, 3/20/19, 3/27/19, 4/3/19, 4/10/19, 4/17/19, 5/1/19, 5/8/19, 5/15/19, 5/22/19. After school Small Group Instruction Program: Targeted enrichment in Social Studies, English, Math, Biology, Chemistry and Physics. ESL and content area teachers in Social Studies, English, Math, Biology, Chemistry and Physics provide support to students in all of the ESL sub-groups in small group settings for one hour per week. The targeted students are 9th/10th grade Entering, Emerging and Transitioning ESL students. The main focus of this program will be to increase the literacy skills in all of the content areas listed, Social Studies, Math, English and Biology. The program will support students to increase their literacy skills across disciplines by enhancing student reading and writing through support in developing vocabulary and grammar skills as well as providing students the chance to improve their academic reading across disciplines. Finally students will have the opportunity to further develop their listening and speaking skills by practicing presentations. In addition, this class not only includes ELL students who are having difficulties with their class work but also provides assistance for ELL students who are working on their 10th grade portfolio projects which include the Social Studies Research paper, Native Language Project, Math Project, Science Project, English Literary Essay, Creative Project as well as their Mastery Statement. The program will place an emphasis on developing all literacy skills which will help to develop students college readiness. The program will consist of seven classes which will each meet once per week with two teachers and have 20-25 students in each of the supplemental Title III classes. These classes are co-taught by one ESL certified teacher working together with one content area fully certified teacher. One class will have one ESL certified teacher working with one certified Math teacher; one class will have one ESL certified teacher working with one certified Biology teacher; one class will have one ESL certified teacher working with one certified Chemistry teacher, one class will have ne ESL certified teacher working with one certiified Physics teacher, one class will have one ESL certified teacher working with one certified social studies teacher; and one class will have an ESL certified teacher working with one certified English teacher. The classes are anticipated to meet weekly for 30 sessions October 9 , 2018 through June 7, 2019 for one hour per class. Two of the classes are expected to meet on Tuesday's from 2:15-3:15 pm for students on early schedule. Two of the classes will meet on Tuesday's from 3:30-4:30 pm for students on late schedule. Two of the classes will meet on Friday's from 2:15-3:15 pm for students on early schedule. Two of the classes will meet on Friday's from 3:30 to 4:30 pm for students on late schedule. Instructional materials will include, teacher hand made materials, scientific calculators, graphing paper, composition notebooks, dictionaries, construction paper and graphing calculators. 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Newspaper class: The rationale of this class is to improve the literacy skills of SIFE, Entering and Emerging level students through English language development through the creation of a student newspaper. The class will target 20 9th/10th grade SIFE, Beginning and Emerging level ESL students. Students will select topics, conduct interviews, and write on a series of school wide topics as well as public issues which concern them. Through their interviews and written articles students greatly enhance their English language development. Students will also become familiar with the latest in computer technology to create their newspaper. Each class will be taught by a certified fully certified ESL teacher teacher. The class is expected to meet for approximately 30 sessions, once a week on Wednesday after school for 2 hours (3:30pm to 5:30 pm from late September 2018 to early June 2019). Additional instructional materials such as the Webster Dictionary, various native language dictionaries, Roget's Thesaurus, audio tape recorders and 5 laptops computers will be purchased to support this class. The tape recorders will assist student in conducting interviews and 5 laptop computers will utilized by students to work on their news stories. All materials utilized during the Title III classes and programs are supplementary to those utilized during the regular school day. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development Program – Describe the school’s professional development program for teachers and other staff responsible for the delivery of instruction and services to limited English proficient students. Title III professional development program will focus on providing teachers with various instructional strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It will also focus on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards and achieve higher scores on all city and state assessments. Teachers participating in the professional development workshops will be paid in the trainee rate and teacher trainers will be paid at per session rate. These professional development sessions will be facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. In addition to our regular monthly professional development meetings held during the school day, teachers working in the supplementary instructional program will receive 7 sessions of professional development after school on Wednesday's from 3:15 pm to 4:15 pm. In addition they have the opportunity to attend outside professional development workshops offered throughout the year by: International Network for Public Schools (INPS), The Middle College National Consortium and New York Performance Standards Consortium. Planned Timeline: 8  Part C: Professional Development 1. One 90 minute session on supporting ELL's with low literacy skills through scaffolding. This workshop will be focusing on the mutually adaptive learning paradigm instructional approach for supporting SIFE students. (Planned: Wed. September 12, 2018, from 3:15-4:15 pm facilitated by Joelle Lobberecht Vecsey, Assistant Principal and Carol Tureski, a ESL licensed pedagogue. Anticipated attendees include five ESL certified teachers and seven non-ESL licensed teachers including: one biology, one chemistry one math, two social studies one English licensed pedagogue and one dully certiified Special Education/English licensed pedagogue. 2. One 1-hour session: on Supporting ELL students to read complex tests. (Planned: Wed. October 10, 2018, from 3:15-4:15 pm. Facilitated by Joelle Lobberecht Vecsey, Assistant Principal/ESL licensed pedagogue.. Anticipated attendance includes: six ESL certified teachers and nine non-ESL certified teachers which included: one Biology certified teacher, one Chemistry certified teacher, two Math certified teachers, two English certified teachers, and two Social Studies certified teachers) and one dually certified Special Education/English licensed teacher. 3. One 1-hour session focusing on Sharing Interdisciplinary Projects Looking Through the Lens of Scaffolding for our ELL's. (Planned: Wednesday November 14, 2018, from 3:15-4:15 pm. To be facilitated Carol Tureski, an ESL licensed pedagogue. Anticipated attendees include five ESL certified teachers and nine content area teachers including: two certified Math teachers, two certified Social Studies teachers, one certified Biology teacher, one certified Chemistry teacher, two certified English teacher and one dually certified Special Education/English teacher. 4. One-1 hour session focusing on Use of Native Language in the Classroom to Support English Language Acquisition. (Planned: Wed. January 9, 2019, from 3:15-4:15 pm. Facilitated by Joelle Lobberecht Vecsey, Assistant Principal/ESL licensed pedagogue. and Stephan Navarez, licensed ESL pedagogue. Anticipated attendees include three ESL certified teachers and nine content area teachers including: two certified Math teachers, two certified Social Studies teachers, one certified Biology teacher, one certified Chemistry teacher, two certified English teachers and one dually certified Special Education/English teacher. 5. One-1 hour session on Student Discourse in the Classroom. Helping students to use academic language in their classroom to converse with focus on claims adn staing evidence. (Planned for: Wed. February 13, 2019, from 3:15-4:15 pm. To be facilitated by Joelle Lobberecht Vecsey, Assistant Principal/ESL licensed pedagogue, Carol Tureski, licensed ESL pedagogue, Amy Burrous, licensed ESL pedagogue. Anticipated attendance includes: three ESL certified teachers and nine certified content area teachers including: two certified Math teacher, two certified Social Studies teacher, one certified Biology teacher, one certified Chemistry teacher, two certified English teachers and one dually certified Special Education/English teacher. 6. One-1 hour session on Building Quantitative Literacy for ELL's Throughout All Disciplines. (Planned for: Wed. March 6, 2019, from 3:15-4:15 pm. To be facilitated by Joelle Lobberecht Vecsey, Assistant Principal/ESL licensed pedagogue, Amy Burrous, Carol Tureski and David Casey, all ESL licensed pedagogues. Anticipated attendance includes: four ESL certified teachers and nine certified content area teachers including: two certified Math teachers, two certified Social Studies teachers, one certified Biology teacher, one certified Chemistry teacher, two certified English teachers and one dually certified Special Education/English teacher. A text that will be used for this professional development workshop 9  Part C: Professional Development is: Reading non-Fiction: Notice & Note Stances, Signposts and Strategies by Kylene Beers and Robert E. Probst (Heinemann) 7. One 1-hour session on Promoting Discipline Related Discussion to Improve Academic Vocabulary and Literacy for ELL's in the Classroom. (Planned for May 1, 2019, to be facilitated by Amy Burrous an ESL licensed pedagogue. Anticipated attendees include five ESL certified teachers and nine content area teachers including: two certified Math teachers, two certified Social Studies teachers, one certified Biology teacher, one certified Chemistry teacher, two certified English teachers and one dually certified Special Education/English teacher. A text will be used for this professional development workshop, Academic Conversations: Classroom Talk that Fosters Critical Thinking and Content Understanding by Jeff Zwiers and Marie Crawford (Stenhouse Publishers) Once again this coming year 15 schools in the Internationals Network of Public Schools (INPS) will jointly plan and coordinate after school workshops to support teachers. Staff from all fifteen schools will continue to be engaged in workshops to discuss second language acquisition, project based education, collaborative learning, thematic interdisciplinary instruction, scaffolding, and language development in the content area. Over the next year International High School will conduct workshops and staff development on curriculum sharing within the school and will work jointly with the other fourteen INPS schools to conduct curriculum sharing so that teachers and staff can benefit from shared knowledge and professional development. (One all day workshop was held on Staff Development Day, November 6, 2018. Future workshops are in the planning stages). Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III program will provide ELL parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a variety of literacy, math, and homework workshops, so that they can better assist in the education and learning or their children at home. Teachers will be paid per session rate. Instructional material will be purchased to support parent activity. Parent Workshops- A series of six 2-hour workshops will be held on different topics of interest to our parents. All specific workshop times and dates are listed below. Each year our PTA assembles of list of suggested topics and the school does its utmost to accommodate these workshop requests. The parent workshops will be facilitated by teachers and guidance counselors from our school. All parents are targeted for these workshops. The workshops are facilitated in English with assistance from staff and student translators in Spanish, Chinese, Bengali, Polish, Tibetan and other languages as needed. This year’s topics will include: International High School provides all parents including ELL parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a variety of literacy, math, and homework workshops, so that they can better assist in the education and learning or their children at home. 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities All records and attendance for the Title III programs and workshops are maintained on file in the main office. These include agendas, attendance sheets and invitations to parents in the parents preferred language. Translation services: Parents are notified of all workshops in several ways: Letters are both mailed and back backed home and translated into as many languages as possible that are spoken by our parents. We utilize the DOE Translation unit to assist in translating all letters to parents in their native languages. The school also sends out telephone languages via school messenger in a variety of languages spoken by our parents. In addition, our parent coordinator attempts to reach all parents directly by phone. Translators are provided to our parents at all workshops through the assistance of bilingual staff, members of our PTA and community translators from the Language Dept. at LaGuardia Community College. In addition, our parents have access to translators provided by the DOE Translation Unit for meetings and workshops. We have the ability to contact the Translations Unit and request a translator for most of our workshops if a parent speaks a language which we are unable to translate in house. The following supplementary parent engagement workshops are in addition to and do not include the mandated parent meetings. • One 2-hour session to focus on Supporting Parent Student Relationships after Reunification due to Immigration. Students and parents will collaborate on a piece of artwork that shows their feeling towards themselves and each other and guides them in a discussion around their relationship. (Planned for: October 25, 2018 from 6-8 pm. Facilitated by Joelle Lobberecht Vecsey, Assistant Principal/licensed ESL pedagogue and Carol Tureski, licensed ESL pedagogue in conjunction with a resident artist from Urban Arts Partnership. • One 2-hour session on the College Application process and how to deal with financial aide forms and college financial aid bureaucracy. This workshop is geared to help the parents of our ELL's navigate the college application system and to learn necessary vocabulary needed to apply for financial aid to colleges.(Planned for December 13, 2018 from 6-8 pm. Facilitated by Theon McGhie, licensed Guidance Counselor and Carol Tureski, licensed ESL teacher and counselor ). • Two 2-hours session on ELL student progress towards graduation and the extra help opportunities and extra curricular activities available to support our ELL students. The focus will be on how parents of ELL's can help their Beginner and Intermediate students pass the ELA exam and do as well as their classes. (Planned for January 17, 2019 from 6-8 pm. Facilitated by Amy Burrous, ESL licensed teacher and Allison McCluer, licensed science teacher/counselor). • One 2-hour session on the Early College Program at The International HS at LaGuardia and how best to help the ELL child become college ready with a focus on needed to know college vocabulary for immigrant families supporting a first time college attendee. (Planned for: March 28, 2019 from 6-8 pm. Facilitated by Daniel Kaplan, International HS Early College Coordinator/licensed Social Studies teacher and David Casey, licensed ESL teacher). • One 2-hour session on the communication and relationship between parents and their teenagers. Focus on sentence starters and role play to support our ELL parents deal with their teenagers. (Planned for: April 18, 2019. 6-8 pm. Class will be facilitated by Joelle Lobberecht Vecsey,, Assistant Principal/licensed ESL teacher and Western Queens Consultation Center.) • One 2-hour session topic TBA. (Planned for May, 2019. 6-8 pm) 1 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name International HS @ LaGuardia Borough Queens School Number 530 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jaclyn Valane Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Carol Tureski Teacher/Subject Area Amy Burrous/English Teacher/Subject Area Allison McCluer/Science Related-Service Provider Theon McGhie/Counseling Superintendent Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Assistant Principal Harry Schutz Coach type here School Counselor Theon McGhie Parent Maria Farro Parent Coordinator Blanca Loria Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Other (Name and Title) Joelle Lobberecht Vecsey/ENL C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 6 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 11 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 547 Total number of ELLs 336 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 61.43% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) n/a n/a n/a K 1 2 Lang. n/a 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For newcomers and SIFE we use do a reading inventory assessment. A vocabulary/reading comprehension assessment given twice a year to measure baseline and progress. We also use teacher-created assessments to provide us with each student's grade level in reading comprehension, writing, speaking and listening skills. The results offer a breakdown of specific areas of strengths and weaknesses, so we can gear our instruction toward helping the student in areas of academic need and tailor extra help specifically geared to those students. The ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) offers the Language Proficiency team, the SITs Team and our teacher instructional team guidance in planning instruction for our ELLs. The teacher made assessments allow us to assess student's decoding skills, vocabulary and comprehension. The results of these assessments are shared with our content area teachers. This information helps inform our school's instructional plan, allowing us to design curriculum to address the specific needs of students. It is particularly helpful for those students in our SIFE class and is a useful tool to share 4  with our content area teachers and after school tutors. In addition, this data is used to inform our curriculum, instructional approaches and interventions. Our teachers work to develop reading and writing skills through all content areas. Through this consistent reinforcement of reading and writing in their classes as well as in our after school and Saturday programming, students see improvement, in their scores over time. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures in place to support us in making our assessments for the instructional planning of ELL students include the Language Proficiency Team utilizing the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) data as well as ELA test scores, student sample writing, scholarship reports as well as 8th grade English and Math test scores to help with instructional planning for ELL's. Our Language Proficiency Team disseminates data gathered from the EDAT to both our academic teacher teams as well as our SITs Team. The teacher teams meet regularly twice per week and utilize data provided to them by the Language Proficiency Team to make specific plans for their ELL students. The SITs Team which meets weekly takes the data information disseminated to them by the Language Proficiency Team and plans strategies for how to benefit our ELL students with IEPs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is measured through the analysis of a wide array of data sources, including: • Graduation rate • Course pass rate • Regents pass rate • Attendance rate • Learning Environment Survey-student results • Learning Environment Survey -parent results • Learning Environment Survey-teacher results • Drop out rate • College class passing rate • Portfolio passing rate International High School at LaGuardia is part of the New York Performance Standards Consortium which is a network of schools who have been granted a variance which allows for portfolio-based assessment in lieu of the New York State Regents Exams. We only administer the ELA Regents exam, and therefore have only included our ELA Regents scores in this document. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? There are many structures in place to address the necessary interventions once the summative data is gathered and discussed by the Language Proficiency Team. After the Language Proficiency Team has examined the summative data the information is disseminated to the various academic instructional teams. The academic instructional teams then plan the best strategies that will help their individual ELL students. Many of our ELL students benefit from our wide variety academic activities in our supplemental title III after school programs. Our ENL teachers target students based on their NYSESLAT and NYSITELL results in order to design a complete program of instruction. All of our before and after school Title III programs have a certified ENL teacher working with a teacher licensed in Social Studies, English, Math, Science or Special Education. The Title III program provides English Language Learners with supplemental instruction in our Saturday Literacy Program as well as in before and after school programs. All of our supplemental Title III Instructional programs have a licensed ENL teacher working directly with the content area teachers to plan curriculum and co-teach the activity. The content area teachers are licensed in English, Social Studies, Science or Math but are always be working directly with an ENL licensed teacher. One intervention in place is our Saturday Literacy Explorers' Program which meets on Saturday's for a total of 22 sessions beginning in mid-October through May, from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 P.M servicing up to thirty students of our ELL students. Group size is maintained at 15 students per teacher. This Saturday class targets 9th/10th graders who tested at the Entering, Emerging and Transitioning level on the NYSESLAT. Each week the class always has two teachers, one certified fully licensed ENL teacher and one certified fully licensed content area teacher in either English, Social Studies, Biology, Chemistry or Math in 5  order to provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Although the content teachers rotate from week to week there is always be at least one ENL licensed teacher present each week. Instruction focuses on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy using English acquisition through new vocabulary learning, oral practice through discussions, learning map skills (with NYC land mark and subway system), and cultural/historical exploration, and conduct interview, journal writing during and after the trip. These trips connect to the instructional program by enabling students to develop skills to enhance their speaking, reading, writing and listening skills. These strategies attempt to help students achieve higher scores on the NYSESLAT. Another intervention is our Reading Plus Program. This computerized reading program assesses student reading skills and provides them with targeted practice through high interest literature that is at and just beyond their reading level. This after school class meets on Wednesday's from 3:30 PM to 5:30 PM. Approximately 100 students are serviced. This class targets 9th/10th grade Entering, Emerging and Transitioning level students. Another intervention is our school Small Group Instruction Program where targeted enrichment in Social Studies, English, Math and Biology. ENL and content area teachers in Social Studies, English, Math and Biology provide support to our ELL students in small group settings for one hour per week. The targeted students are 9th/10th grade Entering, Emerging and Transitioning ENL students. The main focus of this program is to increase the literacy skills in all of the content areas, Social Studies, Math, English and Biology. The program supports students to increase their literacy skills across disciplines by enhancing student reading and writing through support in developing vocabulary and grammar skills as well as providing students the chance to improve their academic reading across disciplines. Finally students have the opportunity to further develop their listening and speaking skills by practicing presentations. This class not only includes ELL students who are having difficulties with their class work but also provides assistance for ELL students who are working on their 10th grade portfolio projects which include the Social Studies Research paper, Native Language Project, Math Project, Science Project, English Literary Essay, Creative Project as well as their Mastery Statement. The program will place an emphasis on developing all literacy skills which will help to develop students college readiness. The program will consist of five classes which will each meet once per week with two teachers and have 20-25 students in each of the supplemental Title III classes. These classes are co-taught by one ENL certified teacher working together with one content area fully certified teacher. Another intervention is our newspaper class: The rationale of this class is to improve the literacy skills of SIFE, Entering and Emerging level students through English language development through the creation of a student newspaper. The class targets 9th/10th grade SIFE, Beginning and Emerging level EL students. Students select topics, conduct interviews, and write on a series of school wide topics as well as public issues which concern them. Through their interviews and written articles students greatly enhance their English language development. Students also become familiar with the latest in computer technology to create their newspaper. Each class is taught by a certified fully certified ENL teacher teacher. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable as we have grades 9-12. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT data from the 2017 NYSESLAT assessment contained in the RLAT indicates that 1.65% of our current students completing 9th grade ENL's have tested as Entering (EN), while 13.22% have tested as Emerging (EM), 22.31% have tested as Transitioning (TR), 42.98% have tested as Expanding (EX) and only 19.83% have tested as Commanding (CM). The data shows that 2.04% of our current students completing 10th grade ENL's have tested as Entering (EN), while 10.20% have tested as Emerging (EM), 53.06% have tested as Transitioning (TR), 31.63% have tested as Expanding (EX), and 3.06% have tested as Commanding (CM). In 11th grade the trend seems to indicate far more students move up to show growth and momentum as 0% of our current 11th graders test as Entering (EN), only 6.38% test as Emerging (EM), 34.04% test as Transitioning (TR), while a whooping 54.26% test as Expanding (EX) and 5.32% test out as Commanding (CM). By 12th grade the trend continues 6  with 0% of ENL students tested as Entering (EN),6.45% of ENL students test as Emerging (EM), 21.51% of ENL students test as Transitioning (TR), but a huge 60.22% test as Expanding (EX) and 11.83% of ENL students test out as Commanding (CM). It seems clear that over the course of their 4 years our students significantly improve in their literary skills. An analysis of our NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results for the school reveals several things:a) Our population is incredibly heterogeneous in terms of language ability.b) Most students classified as Entering and Emerging are in the 9th and 10th grade. c) The number of students testing as Commanding goes up substantially with each grade level after the 9th grade. d) The vast majority of students show improvement in at least two of the NYSESLAT language modalities.e) Our NYSITELL data indicates that although most of our new arrivals test as Entering (EN) and nearly all score very low in listening, reading, and writing, after this, the most crucial pattern we see is one of improvement. The EDAT provides us valuable information to us about how we can target ELL support for our students. For example, from the EDAT we saw more of our incoming 9th and 10th graders scored lower on the writing modality than on the speaking modality. We use the EDAT in order to provide us with a list of students in specific grades that need supports in specific modalities. Then we design an intervention plan based on this data. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have multiple structures in place to disseminate these findings. When results come in from the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL assessments members of our Language Proficiency Team meet to discuss and go over the results. Then the Language Proficiency Team meets with the Guidance Team and the ENL teachers from each team to go over and discuss their individual students needs. Next, the individual classroom teachers meet with both the ELL teacher and guidance counselor to consider the best strategies for each individual student and to decide if the students program needs to be adjusted. In the case of students with IEP's the SIT's team will meet to discuss the students progress based on the NYSESLAT and make recommendations to the instructional team. An individual annual meeting is held with the parents of our ELL students providing, the guidance counselor, ENL teacher, representatives of instructional team and whatever other school staff are necessary to inform the parents about their child's language development in all content areas in English and in the child's home language. This provides parents of all ELL students information regarding changes to the students program as well as any parental concerns. This annual meeting is held in addition to the parent-teacher conferences, parent orientations and other scheduled meetings with parents of ELLs. This annual meeting is conducted in the language that the child's parent or guardian best understands. If necessary, the annual meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the parents preferred language. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction: a. Instruction at our school is delivered collaboratively by interdisciplinary teams of four to six teachers who work to plan instruction for groups of approximately 75 students in their interdisciplinary classes. b. Our school uses all of these program models. Each group of students is block programmed and those students travel together throughout the day. Within their blocks, 9th and 10th grade students are mixed, as are 11th and 12th grade students. The blocks are heterogeneous but at various times teachers may choose to group students within the block homogeneously if that suits the students’ and block’s needs for a specific project.c. Integrated and Standalone ENL are implemented: Beginning/Entering students will receive a minimum of 540 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of ENL standalone, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 180 minutes of standalone or integrated 7  ENL (with ELA or any other content area). Low Intermediates/Emerging will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area. Intermediate/Transitioning will receive 180 ENL minutes per week which consists of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Advanced/Expanding will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week which consists of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Proficient/Commanding or students who are former ELL's will receive 90 minutes of ENL each week which consists of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2. Mandated Instructional minutes:As per CR Part 154 requirements, the students are carefully programmed to receive the mandated ENL and ELA instructional minutes based on the proficiency guidelines. Beginners/Entering students will receive a minimum of 540 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of ENL standalone, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 180 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Low Intermediates/Emerging will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area.) Intermediate/Transitioning will receive 180 ENL minutes per week (this consists of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Advanced/Expanding will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) Proficient/Commanding or students who are former ELL's will receive 90 minutes of ENL each week (this consists of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) We have a series of delivery models to ensure that each student receives these mandated ENL and ELA minutes through discrete ENL classes as well as many classes taught by dual certified ENL/content area teachers. (ie: teachers who have dual certification in both ENL and a content area such as ENL/English, ENL/Social Studies and ENL/Biology certification.) Each instructional team includes at least one teacher who is licensed in ENL; in addition, all of our content area teachers are trained in language development and ENL methodologies and encouraged to pursue ENL certification. The school schedule and teacher programming ensure that all entitled ENL students receive the mandated number of minutes required according to CR Part 154. In addition to our regular content curriculum all ELL students are given extra ENL instruction in order to meet the number of minutes they require of ENL instruction each week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 3. Delivery of content material: At International High School our ENL teachers as well as all of our content area teachers provide content area support for ELL's through all content area classes. All students take math, science, social studies, and ENL and/or English every year. Although the language that teachers use from the front of the room is English, the language of instruction for specific projects and on any specific day is collaboratively determined – students use both English and their native languages to explore content and the locus of control for language is student-driven by the content and the students’ needs. Instruction is not unidirectional from teacher to student in our school. Students work in groups to complete collaborative tasks that both develop language and content knowledge.The instructional method used in delivering content area instruction is through the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) Approach. This research-based instructional approach utilizes five strategies which foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. They consist of heterogeneity and collaboration, experiential and project based learning, language and content integration, localized autonomy and responsibility and one learning model for all. A variety of instructional materials are used such as: laptops, library books, work books, dictionaries and teacher-generated activities. The educational principles of The Internationals HS at LaGuardia include an approach to curriculum that is student-centered, inquiry- driven, and project-based, 8  revolving around themes and essential questions that provide a balance between content and English language skill building. Small, heterogeneous grouping within classes provides a powerful vehicle for English acquisition, wherein students from diverse language backgrounds use English to accomplish a given task, drawing on their native language as a resource. Language and literacy are developed through interaction with peers and teachers about meaningful ideas in authentic context. In order to provide our students with native language support in the content area we provide our students with bilingual dictionaries, peer group support, native language texts, as well as bilingual paraprofessionals to assist in the classroom. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 4. Ensuring that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages?At the International High School at LaGuardia, ELL’s are appropriately evaluated using the instructional strategies as described in Question # 6 (a-e) below. At orientation, incoming ELL’s are given a native language assessment. At the International HS, we greatly value students' native languages. All of our interdisciplinary classes have native language components to them. We also offer college native language classes in many languages. We have a comprehensive native language performance-based assessment which all of our ELL students must complete. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Instructional plan for SIFE Students:All students who are identified as SIFE students (Students with Interrupted/Inconsistent Formal Education) are immediately placed in our SIFE program where they receive additional support in English literacy until a level of proficiency is achieved as determined by the SIFE coordinator and the SIFE leadership team along with the student’s individual teachers and guidance counselors. In planning to differentiate instruction for SIFE students the common denominator among these students is a weakness or inability to read or write in their native language. Teachers and guidance counselors identify students who meet this profile through an examination of report cards, educational history and student work, student parent interviews and teachers referrals. Once students are identified to enter the SIFE program, our challenge is to find ways to teach students to read and write in English and acquire content knowledge when they have limited, if any, literacy skills in any language and may also have serious affective issues as well. In order to service students who are struggling, each team has provided extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction, and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs (such as an extra language arts period) have been made. Over the past four years with the money’s from the SIFE grant literacy program an accelerated literacy program was implemented school-wide and met with enthusiasm by staff, students and parents.Our SIFE model, funded through Fair Student Funding, requires three important features:• An intensive Language Arts period is held during the regular core daily program to accelerate learning taught by a specially trained literacy ENL licensed teacher in small group settings of five to ten students in which instruction is guided by individual students’ needs. This class is focused on reading comprehension, reading fluency and vocabulary development based on high interest topics drawn from the social studies curriculum.• Scaffolding students’ work in regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the SIFE teacher and content area teachers to generalize and practice newly learned skills and strategies across a variety of settings. A team teaching approach would be used in which the SIFE teacher plans with the content areas teacher, works with SIFE students in the classroom daily to implement strategies, and also meets after class sessions with the content area teacher to discuss students’ work and review lessons and activities.• All SIFE students are expected to attend extra after school home work sessions and are also enrolled in our weekly Saturday Explorers club which serves to enhance their literacy skills through exploration of NYC and its environment.• Our SIFE Leadership team has completed a SIFE toolkit which will be shared with other SIFE schools throughout the city. • Our SIFE Leadership team has also hosted a series of Open Houses over the past four years for SIFE Teachers from throughout the city in order to share best practices among educators of SIFE as well as all ELL students. b)Instructional Plan for Newcomer ELL Students:The plan for differentiating instruction for newcomers to the school, along with their parents, begins by meeting initially with a guidance counselor who assesses their needs and academic 9  development during intake. All new students and their parents receive an orientation developed by the guidance staff along with the parent coordinator. All students new to the United States and to NYC are given the NYSITELL exam which assesses the students English language abilities. For students transferring in from NYC schools, test results are reviewed and students are then matched with teams of teachers who it is felt would best meet the needs of the specific student. In differentiating instruction for these newcomer ELLs. Students are placed in appropriate classes according to their specific needs. The teachers meet in team to discuss the specific needs of all new students. A plan is formulated to best meet the needs of each particular student. c) Instructional Plan for Developing ELL's:The plan differentiating instruction for developing ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years consists of ongoing support and mentoring. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are placed in appropriate classes to best meet their needs and continue their English language development. Their teachers meet regularly in teams to discuss the needs fo the specific students. A plan is formulated and updated regularly to meet the needs of each student. ELLs who are receiving service for 4-6 years receive a full program and receive all the same support structures as the rest of our ELL populations. Struggling ELLs who are receiving 4-6 years of service are encouraged and often mandated to avail themselves of all the extra support opportunities provided to all the students at large. This help takes the form of one-on-one mentoring, small group instruction, after school homework help, the Saturday literacy program as well as a variety of other activities. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are encouraged to try to take some college classes to help them to begin the transition towards college life. These ELLs with 4-6 years who meet regularly with their guidance counselor and teachers on their team to receive support and feedback to help assess in their language development. d) Instructional Plan for Long Term ELL's:The plan for differentiating instruction for long term ELLs consists of ongoing support and mentoring. Long term ELLs continue with a full program whether they are with us 5 or 6 years and retain all of the same support structures in place for the entire student population. Struggling long term ELLs are encouraged to take advantage of all extra help opportunities provided to the students at large. This extra help takes the form of one-on-one mentoring, small group instruction, after school homework help, writing center as well as a variety of other activities. Whenever possible, long-term ELLs are encouraged to begin taking college classes to help them to begin the transition towards college life. International High School long term ELLs regularly begin taking remedial college classes. All long term ELLs in college classes receive support from a high school teacher mentor. e )Instructional Plan for Former ELL's up to 2 years after exiting ELL status):As students reach proficiency and test out through the NYSESLAT assessment, they continue to receive a full program of ENL services to support and provide for their continued academic growth and development of English proficiency. In planning for differentiating instruction for there former ELL students, they receive higher levels of project opportunities and also have the opportunity to take college classes in any of their academic areas. Our school offers these students the opportunity to receive an Associates Degree from LaGuardia Community College along with their high school diploma as part of a five year program. Students who are determined to have reached proficiency continue to receive support from their teachers as needed. All former ELLs receive their mandated .5 unit of ENL services. Former ELLs continue to receive the mandated testing accommodations after they they have tested out on the NYSESLAT exam. All former ELLs in college classes receive support from a high school teacher mentor and continue to receive support from their teachers as needed. All former ELLs receive their mandated .5 unit of ENL services. Former ELLs continue to receive the mandated testing accommodations after they they have tested out on the NYSESLAT exam. All former ELLs in college classes receive support from a high school teacher mentor. The funding for the above programs are provided by Fair Student Funding. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade level materials used to provide ELL-SWDs access to academic areas and accelerate English language development:The SITS Team made up of guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher review all IEP’s for ELL-SWD’s to ensure that all IEP mandates are being met and to ensure that the ELL-SWD student receives the appropriate program in the least restrictive environment. After reviewing the mandates of the IEP, the full team of teachers meet with the Special Education teacher to discuss specific instructional strategies that would prove valuable to the growth of the ELL-SWD student and follow the mandates of the IEP. The team along with the guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher ensure that all of the mandates in the IEP are carried out. If additional support is needed the student is provided with additional support services as per the IEP. The ELL-SWD students who may have learning needs undiagnosed in their home country, have been here a short time and are only beginning to learn English, and/or have experienced serious disruptions and inadequacies in their earlier academic preparation are addressed by creating instructional 0  opportunities geared to their needs. Students with Individualized Education Plans (IEP's) receive full support from the instructional teams to which they belong. Those students are included in mainstream classes, and receive additional services in language, counseling, and adaptive physical education. In biweekly meetings, the teachers of our instructional teams meet to review the progress of these and other students. Teams of teachers along with the guidance counselors meet regularly throughout the semester to review the progress of each student in accordance with their specific IEP.Some of the specific instructional strategies for ELLs depending on the requirements of their specific IEP’s include: Teachers, guidance counselors and special education teacher meet regularly to discuss the individual needs of the ELL-SWD student. Once students have been identified as ELL-SWD and a program has been established following the mandates of their IEP, the challenge is to find ways to teach the student the skills they require while also teaching the student to read, write and speak English and acquire content knowledge when they may have limited, if any academic skills, have specific disabilities as described in their IEP and may have serious affective issues as well. In order to service the ELL-SWD student in the least restrictive environment, students are mainstreamed into the regular academic class and each team provides extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs are made to allow the student time to meet with the necessary special service provider depending on the students specific needs. Other strategies include scaffolding students’ work in the regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the special education teacher or service provider and the content area teachers. A team teaching approach would be used in which the special education teacher plans with the content area teachers to map out strategies an best practices and to access the students strengths and area which still need improvement.If necessary, ELL-SWD students are expected to attend extra after school home work sessions and are also enrolled in our weekly Saturday Explorers Literacy Program which serves to enhance their literacy skills through exploration of NYC and its environment. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The International HS at LaGuardia uses a variety of curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWD’s to attain their IEP goals within the least restrictive environment. Once students are identified ELL-SWD’s our challenge is to find ways to teach students according to the mandates of their IEP’s in the least restrictive setting. The SITs team will meet with the students guidance counselor and instructional team will meet with our Special Education teacher or service provider depending on the needs of that students particular IEP in order to determine the best instructional strategies to meet the needs to that student according to their IEP. In order to service students who are struggling, each instructional team has provided extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction, and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs (such as an extra language arts period) have been made. By adapting curriculum to enable those students to succeed, by expanding the time available to team members to work with them individually, and by using the resources of paraprofessionals, student teachers and LaGuardia interns, they are supported in meeting the graduation certification requirements. Our plan maintains that our future students with IEP’s will receive additional academic assistance in accordance with the particular needs of their individualized IEP’s. Additional supports are provided to assist ELL-SWDs with graduation-level portfolio work. These supports include one-on-one mentoring with the special education teacher. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our targeted intervention program are geared towards supporting all of our ELL subgroups; teachers running these programs implement the “Internationals Approach” in all of them:• Saturday Literacy Program (Explorer’s Club/ENL)—classes will meet a total of 30 sessions beginning in September, through mid June, from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 P.M. 12-15 students will be served. Group size will be maintained at 6-7 students per teacher. This class will be targeted to Entering and Emerging level students only. Certified ENL teachers along with content area teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy using English acquisition through new vocabulary learning, oral practice through discussions, 1  learning map skills (with NYC land mark and subway system), and cultural/historical exploration, and conduct interview, journal writing during and after the trip. These strategies will help students achieve higher scores on the NYSESLAT. Students create a brochure “Places to go in New York City” by the end of the year. For some of the sessions, students first meet a 9 a.m. to do classroom work and go off on trips visiting various museums and land marks in NYC. In addition to 2 teachers, instructional material, general classroom supply, and snacks will be purchased to support the Saturday Academy. • Enrichment class—All 365 ELL students receive targeted intervention enrichment classes in literacy and math which meet four times per week for 30 minutes throughout the year during the regular school day. Group size will be maintained at 15-18 students per teacher. This class will be targeted to Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding level students. Certified ENL teachers along with content area teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy work on students portfolio projects and oral presentations.• SIFE ENL Literacy class---specially addresses instruction in second language acquisition to improve literacy performance through new vocabulary learning, pronunciation, read-out loud, oral practice through conversation and discussion, and sentence structure. Two classes, each consisting of 10 students and meeting for 50 sessions in total, meet 4 times a week for 70 minutes each, from late September to early June. This class will target Entering and Emerging level students to help them improve on the NYSESLAT. Instructional material, general classroom supplies and snacks will be purchased to support this class.• SIFE Math Literacy class- specially addresses instruction in math literacy as well as in second language acquisition to improve math literacy performance through classroom discussion of mathematical concepts and word problems, vocabulary learning, pronunciation and oral practice through conversation and discussion. Two classes each consisting of 10 students and meeting for 50 sessions in total, 4 times a week for 70 minutes each, from late September to early June. This class will target Entering and Emerging level students to help them improve both on the Integrated Algebra Regents as well as the NYSESLAT. Instructional material, general classroom supplies and snacks will be purchased to support this class.• Year Book---This class will improve literacy skill and performance of 15-20 Transitioning and Expanding level students through English language development through hands-on, activity-based sessions with student discussion, writing text & captions, and designing layouts and proofing and editing all written work. Thus, students’ English language development is enhanced. Students will meet 30 sessions, once a week for 70 minutes from late September to early June. Student will publish annual school year book in spring and produce digital year book at the end of the year. Software, General supply, snack will be purchased to support this class.• Student Community Involvement—ELL students have opportunities to do community service, research projects, and leadership training. This will culminate in their understanding of social issues that pertain to immigrant populations and thus enhance cultural awareness, social learning and a positive adjustment to American society. Over the past few years our students and staff have worked with a variety of outside community based organizations such as Advocacy Lab, Facing History and Ourselves, Sanctuary for Families, The AAFE-Asian Americans for Equality, Go Green Western Queens, Recycle a bike, Child Center of NY-WIA Program and Sunnyside Community Services among others. Currently 25 ELL students are participating in an internship/career readiness program with The Child Center of NY-WIA Program. Over the past years participants in these programs identified, planned and implemented projects covering themes such as: 1) preventing bias, sexism and racism through dialogue facilitation, 2) Helping tenants know their rights regarding housing issues, 3) Preserving our water and keeping it clean, 4) Providing Resources to increase literacy in your Native Language, 5) Young Immigrants and Access to Financial Aid, 6) How to handle depression and eating disorders. Our staff will be trained by the two organizations. Several of our teachers will spend forty hours in total in support of partnership work with community organizations. These are all supplemental activities which will aid our students in acquiring English through a variety of community involvement activities. This targeted intervention targets students in all content areas but gives special emphasis to the content area of Social Studies. Before/After School Tutoring-content area teachers in Social Studies, the students native language, English, Math and Science. Content area teachers in Social Studies, English, Math and Science provide support to students in all sub-groups in small group settings for one to two hours per week. Although all students may avail themselves of Before/After School tutoring the main ELL sub-groups which are targeted are the SIFE students, Newcomers and ELL-SWD students. This not only includes students who are having difficulties with their class work but also provides assistance for students who are working on their 10th grade and Senior Graduation portfolio projects which include their social studies research paper, native language project, math project, science project, English literary essay, creative project as well as their mastery statement. These classes are taught by licensed pedagogues in the content area. Native language support is provided to students in all of the above mentioned intervention programs through the use of paraprofessionals, bilingual pedagogues, 2  student peer and college mentors who share a common native language. In addition, bilingual dictionaries and multi-lingual computer software are utilized as well. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Due to the success of our Early College Native Language classes and a changing demographic we recently added Uzbek to the growing list of native language classes that our students take. This program has been highly successful and we plan to continue and possibly expand the program and offer an additional native language class this upcoming school year. We are measuring success by student outcomes in the Early College Native Language classes. The data of student scores, provided by LaGuardia Community College, in this college class showed that 88% of our students who took the course passed with a grade of C of higher. Based on that high result, and on feedback that we collected from students who said that reading college-level native language literature was a valuable experience, we decided to increase our offerings for the 2017-2018 school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Since approximately 62% of our students are ELLs and the remainder are former ELLs, all school programs are “equal access.” In addition to the support and intervention services listed in the answer to question five of this section, we have the following after-school classes; while they may not all be “academic” in theme, all of them are designed to continue students’ language development through activities incorporating listening, speaking, reading, and writing of English: • SAT Math Prep• SAT Verbal Prep• Student Government• Haitian and African Club• Art Talk• Theater• Human Rights Group• Teen Developmental Group• Chinese Club• Environmental Club• Computer Technology• Garden Club• Latino Culture• Filipino Club• Western Queen Consultation Center• Liberty Partnership• EarSay Theater Program All ELLs and former ELLs are invited to participate in the activities listed above at the time that they register for classes each semester. At registration they meet with their guidance counselor and teachers on their instructional team who describe the different activities. Students make a selection with the assistance of their teachers. Since 100% of our students are either ELLs or former ELLs the representation by ELLs in all of our school programs is substantial. In addition, since we are an Early College program all of our students are entitled to take free college level classes at LaGuardia Community College. As part of our Early College Program all of our students ELL and non-ELL have the option to stay for a 5th year and earn up to 60 College credits with an opportunity to complete an Associates Degree from LaGuardia Community College. Funding sources for after school and supplemental services offered to ELL’s in our school:Since our school funds are conceptually consolidated, the funding source for most of our after school targeted interventions listed in section 9 above and many of those listed in this section are covered by Title III funding as well as tax levy funding. The SIFE literacy and SIFE math classes which are held during the regular school day are currently funded exclusively with tax levy funds. The funding for the enrichment class is also covered by regular tax levy funding since it takes place during the regular school day. The funding for many of the activities listed in this section above are covered by the volunteer CBO organizations running the program. (ie: Liberty Partnership Program). 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. It is the philosophy of the school that classroom teachers are the most knowledgeable as to what instructional supplies will benefit the ELL students from all ELL sub-groups in their content area classes. Teachers work in teams to order classroom supplies for the ELL students they have in common. The teachers in consultation with the colleagues on their team as well as in consultation with the schools SIFE teacher and guidance counselors which classroom supplies would be most beneficial to the students in all of the schools sub-groups. Each teacher team selects the instructional material they feel will work best for the needs of their individual students. This helps to best meet the needs of all of our students in the individual sub-groups within our school, Newcomers, SIFE, ELL’s 4-6 years, long term ELLs as well as former ELLs. Each team shares equally in the school’s NYSTL funds and chooses for itself how they wish to spend the schools their allotment of funds to best serve their 3  individual students in all of their content area classes. Teachers and students in all ELL-subgroups have access to a huge array of novels, textbooks, non-fiction, bilingual dictionaries as well as native language books. All of the materials are available to all ELL sub-groups.Teachers are encouraged to attend ENL conferences to share information regarding various texts as well as other teaching aids and in addition our teachers work collaboratively to create their own instructional materials. Teachers utilize computer software, maps, the Internet as well as various other forms of technology which helps to maximize instruction in all content areas and within all sub-groups. Teachers in all content area have access to class sets of laptop computers with Internet access as well as two fully equipped computer labs. Teachers are having students use power point projectors to share the results of group projects or individual research. Smart carts with laptops are bringing technology into the classroom and extending the number of computers available to students outside the computer labs. Various non profit Internet organizations that provide feedback for students are helping students to revise and edit their work as well as suggesting additional resources. Our students have the full use the LaGuardia Community College Library and through inter library loan, the entire CUNY system. Additionally, teachers have made use of library book funds provided by the school to create mobile classroom libraries with books that are more accessible and more appealing to ELLs as well as all the other sub-groups of students within our school. The Teaching and Learning Committee has amassed a compendium of book lists, articles on literacy, and reading programs for reference by the instructional teams. All students including ELL students in all sub-groups, have access to a variety of technologies including a technology lab, wireless laptop computers. Students use various web based programs. Other resources available to all students and ELL sub-groups include native language texts and all students including all ELL sub-groups have access to our rather extensive native literature collection. In addition, all of our ELL students have their own individual accounts for Rosetta Stone in English in order to help their English language acquisition. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? All our students participate in our language development/ENL program. All of our classes use the native language to support and assess learning. As described above, the locus of control over language use resides with our students and they use both English and their native languages to discover and develop content. Some projects every year are done in the native languages and in English and students are supported in developing their native languages to the greatest extent possible. Students are supported by peers, community partners, family members and/or school personnel. Native language skills are a valued aspect of all subject area classes. Students are required to complete a Native language project as one component of their graduation portfolio. This native language project is an informational, communicative or creative piece in a language other than English, along with a written explanation of the piece in English. In addition, our ELL students whose native language is Bengali, Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Polish, Tibetan and Uzbek are identified and given a college native language proficiency test in reading and writing which is assessed by the Education Language Acquisition Department at LaGuardia Community College. According to the results approximately 75 ELLs were enrolled in a college level native language literature class in the 2016-2017 school year at LaGuardia Community College in one of four native language literature classes. Each of these college native literature classes resulted in a culminating native language project. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our instructional teams meet regularly to ensure that required services and supports correspond to ELLs' age and grade levels. All of the required services for high school-aged ELLs are available to students. We use a wide array of resources in our school including teacher-made materials, text books on a range of levels, trade books at many reading levels, and a large variety of non-text hands on materials. In addition, our school has wireless access in all classrooms and students use the Internet to access resources. If a teacher or instructional team is having problems locating published materials that are appropriate to the age of the ELLs then the instructional teams work together to create an adapt material which will be appropriate to the age level of the ELL. Our teachers understand the importance of utilizing materials and resources for the ELL’s appropriate age level in order to keep them engaged in learning. In addition, instructional teams are encouraged to attend professional development workshops throughout the year in order to help them better meet the needs of ELLs with age and grade level appropriate to the content of the classes. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Both International High School at LaGuardia and Middle College High School share a campus. ELL students from both have the full use the LaGuardia Community College Library and through inter library loan, the entire CUNY system. All ELL students 4  from both schools share access to a variety of technologies including a technology lab, and web based programs available through LaGuardia Community College. International High School has a gathered a fairly large array of native language texts and all students including all ELL students from both schools share access to the rather extensive native literature collection. Students from both schools share access to our Early College Native Language classes and share classes in a large variety of native languages. On Wednesday afternoons from 1 PM to 4:30 PM students from both of our schools are encouraged to register for native language elective college classes taught by a college professor which upon completion will earn the students from 3 to 6 college foreign language credits from LaGuardia Community College. In order to be able to provide for these classes space is often donated by either or both schools to hold the classes. Through our Early College Program both of our schools share access to a variety of classes in all academic subjects. In terms of after school activities our schools participate on the same sports teams and intramural. Both of our schools share membership in the Middle College National Consortium through which our teach have shared frequent professional development and our students participate together in the Middle College National Student Conference. Our schools are collegial and are happy to share instructional materials as well as expertise in areas concerning ELL students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Prior to the school year, new ELL students are assigned to attend an introductory two day orientation session at the beginning of the school year. Students receive a tour of the school facilities and take part in ice breaker activities in an effort to become more comfortable with the high school environment. During that orientation new students are assessed as to their English language abilities. During this time, SIFE students are assessed and also students are offered a native language assessment by LaGuardia Community College to determine if they are eligible to enroll in native language college classes.New students are assigned to heterogeneous teams (or clusters) with, as far as practicable, students who speak their native language. The new students are then paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. During this time a meeting is held with the parents of incoming ELLs to provide them with an understanding of the resources available to them at the school as well as within the community.Many similar activities take place when ELL students enroll throughout the school year. When a new student enrolls they meet with their guidance counselor and, along with the assistance of a translator, receive a one on one orientation to the school and the community. Just as with the students who began in September, students who enroll throughout the year are paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. These students will also have the opportunity to take the LaGuardia Community College native language assessment to determine if they are eligible to enroll in native language college classes. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The International HS at LaGuardia awards six high school credits in the student’s native language as per Part 100 of Commissioner’s Regulations NYS, Section 100.5. which is based on students previous language experience in their native country plus the completion of a native language project as a part of their graduation portfolio. In addition, our students are all part of the Early College Program at LaGuardia Community College and able to select from a broad range of foreign language electives from the college catalog including, Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Tibetan, Polish, French, Italian, Korean, Japanese and Uzbek among many other languages. On Wednesday afternoons from 1 PM to 4:30 PM our students are encouraged to register for native language elective college classes taught by a college professor which upon completion will earn the students from 3 to 6 college foreign language credits from LaGuardia Community College. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 5 Not applicable. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. Professional Development Plan:To achieve our instructional goals and implement our core beliefs an extensive structure of professional development has been developed. This professional development structure is on-going and fully integrated into our school structure. The principal repository of professional development has been the instructional teams in the school. Our entire school is divided into five team learning communities. The three Junior Institute 9th and 10th grade teams are each comprised of five teachers and approximately eighty students. The two senior institute 11th and 12th grade teams are comprised of 7-8 teachers and approximately 130 students. The teachers meet twice weekly to plan, develop and implement their curriculum and instruction. Teams typically interview and hire their team members, and meet at the beginning of the year to help each other develop goals. They develop and revise curriculum and model collaborative work for their students. Teachers also meet in cross-team groups to share student work and curriculum. They are also sharing strategies for maintaining project-based curriculum with meeting the demands of the Regents exams. All members of the International High School faculty serve on one of the four school-wide committees, Teaching and Learning, Personnel, Student Life, and Support Services. The first two committees mentioned are charged with the implementation of different aspects of the school-wide instructional approach to further assist teachers with the implementation of our curriculum. The Student Life Committee allows for open lines of communication between students and staff and empowers students to become a partner in planning their educational opportunities. The Support Services Committee works to support students, to ensure that their affective needs are being met so that they may fully participate in the instructional program. The faculty run committees plan and coordinate staff development day activities, which focus on improving instruction. Faculty meetings have also had workshops in the areas of crisis management run by our counselors from Support Services. ELL techniques, literacy and native language Instruction workshops were also led by staff members. Our SIFE Leadership team meets regularly to discuss curriculum issues and students’ progress within the program. In addition, members of the SIFE Leadership team have run workshops to share techniques on meeting the variety of literacy challenges faced by teachers of ELLs. We continue to work closely with academic experts exploring several approaches in order to develop a toolbox of strategies that all of our teachers can use with students and share throughout content areas.For this year’s goals, the instructional teams met and completed the following school wide goals to help them address the Common Core Learning Standards. Category: Language and Content Integration:Goal 1: To create units that help students develop disciplinary and interdisciplinary academic language. Category: Localized Autonomy and Responsibility:Goal #2: To develop students’ skills towards the higher levels of the New York State Performance Standards Consortium’s rubric in each discipline area and to work with students on their personal and academic strengths and weaknesses through projects. In order to assist our teachers of ELLs in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards we have planned to offer the multiple opportunities for professional development throughout the year. These professional development sessions are facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. 1. Classroom Environment and Assessment: (Planned for: September 5, 2018)• Supporting SIFE and IEP students to access a rigorous curriculum• Building a supportive classroom environment from the start• NYS Performance Standards Consortium (NYSPSC) Portfolio Rubrics: Getting students to understand them and using them throughout the year as an assessment tool• Using baseline and benchmark assessments that are aligned to the Common Core2. Alignment of Curriculum Meetings (Twelve meetings planned for year: 9/12/18,10/10/18, 10/31/18, 11/28/18 ,12/12/18, 1/9/19, 1/30/19, 2/13/19, 3/13/19, 4/18/19, 5/1/19, 5/29/19)• Sharing unit maps and getting feedback on how to improve use of discipline specific academic language• Sharing baseline and benchmark assessments and getting feedback on how to develop students; skills towards higher levels of NYSPSC rubric in discipline area• Sharing syllabus and getting feedback on coherent curriculum throughout the year that builds on portfolio skills.3. Curriculum Sharing: (Planned for: January 16, 2019)• All teachers bring portfolio project task and sample student work to share• Collect feedback on how well project allowed for students to reach higher levels of the NYSPSC rubric, and how project in the future can be improved to allow for students to reach high levels of the rubric. 6  -Portfolio Project Inter-Rater Reliability:• Norming of portfolio rubrics for each project. Additional supports provided to teachers include: Support Provided to Staff to Assist ELL's Transitioning from middle school to high school: Professional development for all staff at The International High School at LaGuardia is geared toward improving ELL academic achievement and language development; we build teacher capacity in these areas by a variety of means: a. Peer observations: teachers observe each other teach and write reflective letters pinpointing new strategies and techniques they have learned as a result. b. Conferences: faculty attend a variety of external conferences each year in order to keep abreast of new trends in ENL and their content areas. c. Q-TEL/OELL trainings: Our classroom teachers are encouraged to complete workshops with QTEL and other OELL offerings, which highlight best practices, like scaffolding and differentiation, for working with ELLs in the content areas. d. RFP PD Projects: small self-selected groups of teachers engage in action research projects throughout the year in order to learn more about specific ENL methodologies and strategies in order to enhance student achievement; all faculty present findings and recommendations to the rest of the staff so that all may benefit from the work of the rest. e. The Internationals' Network for Public Schools New Teacher Summer PD: This two day workshop introduces new International High School teachers to best practices and ENL methodologies. f. Middle College National Consortium Workshops: As a member of the MCNC members of our staff attend workshops and conferences throughout the year on a variety of issues related to helping our ELLs and non-ELL students to become college ready. Over the last few years their workshops have dealt with literacy and numeracy through all discipline studies. g. Formative Assessment: our staff participates in ongoing professional development throughout the school year in developing and refining formative assessments for our school (in conjunction with the NYS Performance Standards Consortium.) 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All of our teaching staff, which includes teachers who do not hold ENL or Bilingual licenses, are provided with a series of professional opportunities at International High School. The professional development program focuses on providing teachers with various instructional strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It also focuses on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards. These professional development sessions are facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. 1. Two 2-hour session on supporting SIFE and IEP students to access a rigorous curriculum (Planned for: September 12, 2018) 2. One 1-hour session on Academic language for ELL students: (Planned for: 10/17/18)• Introduction on language development and our students• Sharing unit maps on teams and coming up with interdisciplinary academic language that the team can focus on together with ELL students. 3. Two-2 hour sessions on Language and Content Integration for ELLs: (Planned for: Nov. 14, 2018)• Various language and content integration workshops led by the Internationals Network for Public Schools 4. One 1-hour session using SMART board to build entry point for all ELL students (Planned for December 5, 2018. 5. Two-2 hour session on Language and Content Integration for ELLs: (Planned for January 28, 2019) • Strategies in the classroom integrating language and content• Strategies:-The Language Experience Approach-Vanishing Cloze-Joint Sentence Construction 6. One 1- hour session: Native language Use in the Classroom (Planned for March 20,2019)• How to 7  incorporate native language and use it as a support for students in the classroom 7. One 1- hour session: Let’s Give ‘Em Something to Talk About: Language and Content Integration: (Planned for April 10, 2019)• Social and Academic language sentence matching• Barrier crossword• Word matching (Nominalization)• Cause and Effect Sentence Combining In addition, our staff participates in the Internationals Network for Public Schools Professional Development workshops: at three different points throughout the year our entire staff will meet with their peers from our sister International High Schools and attend workshops designed specifically for educators of recent immigrant ELL students. Topics will include scaffolding instruction, differentiation of instruction, ENL methodologies, SIFE students, meeting the affective needs of immigrant children, and language development.Other members of our non-teaching staff also attend staff development training. Our school secretaries and parent coordinator take part in many of the above mentioned staff development activities along with teachers. In addition, our secretaries attend an all day Children’s First Network (CFN) staff development for secretaries on Election day and our Parent Coordinator attends the mandatory two day Respect for all Anti-Harassment Initiative to prevent bullying and bias related incidents. Since all of our staff participates in the above-mentioned professional development opportunities throughout the school year, plus many more staff members avail themselves of the professional development opportunities listed in part 2 above, everyone receives many more hours than the current 50% mandated total for bi-lingual/ENL teachers. Agenda's and attendance sheets for all staff development meetings are kept by administration in the main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We will hold annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs at least one time during each school year, in addition to the four regular parent teacher conferences. At these meetings teachers will discuss the goals of the program, the language development process of the individual student, the language proficiency assessment results as well as the student's language development needs in all content areas. During these annual individual meetings the parent will be informed their child's English language development in each content area. At this meeting we will have content area teachers, the students' ENL teacher, the student counselor, and a school staff member to translate as needed. If no staff member is able to translate than we will utilize the DOE Translation Unit to hold over the phone translations.The International High School has teachers working collaboratively on five interdisciplinary teams. Each of the teams meet together to discuss students' language development and content knowledge progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs during their weekly two hour meeting.Each interdisciplinary team has 40 minutes of their weekly team time to utilize for parent involvement time. This period of time which is within the teacher's contractual day is specifically set aside for meetings with parents of ELL's. Each team is assigned a paraprofessional or Community Associate in order to place phone calls to parents to schedule meetings. In order to ensure that parent needs are accommodated we will utilize our faculty members in order to make phone calls to parents to arrange individual meetings. When a faculty member is not available to translate we will utilize the DOE Translation Unit to ensure that all parents receive information about their individual parent meeting in their native language. Our five interdisciplinary teams will work with parents schedules to coordinate the best time for the individual parent meetings.Upon parents arrival to school, they will sign in on a computer in the main office with translation help when needed. Teams will document which parents attend their meetings and will make follow up outreach to any parents who have not been able to attend a scheduled meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The International High School provides all parents including ELL parents/guardians with a great many parent involvement activities such as the opportunity to attend a variety of literacy, math, and homework workshops, so that they can better assist in the education and learning or their children at home. Due to our partnership with LaGuardia Community College, during the 2016-2017 school year parents of our students were invited to register for free Parent ENL classes held at LaGuardia Community College for parents wanting to learn English. This year we are hoping to to continue with this opportunity for our parents including: Parent Workshops---A series of 2-hour workshops will be held on different topics of interest to our parents. Each year our PTA assembles of list of suggested topics and the school does its utmost to accommodate these 8  workshop requests. This year some possible topics and projected dates based on parent feedback include: • One 2-hour session on how parents can help their children to succeed in high school and introducing parents to the International HS instructional model. (Planned for September 2018). • One 2-hour session on the College Application process and how to deal with financial aid forms and college financial aid bureaucracy. (Planned for October, 2018). - One 1-hour sessions to: a) Title I Annual Parent Meeting; (Planned for September 2018). - Two 2-hour session on the communication and relationship between parents and their teens. (Planned: December, 2018) • One 2-hour session on the Early College Program at The International HS @ LaGuardia Community College. (Planned: January, 2019) • One 2-hour sessions on how parents can use Engrave as a tool to keep up with how their child is doing in school. (Planned for: February, 2019). • One 2-hour session on protecting you against job and housing discrimination and your rights presented by one of our CBO’s, Sanctuary for Families, an immigrants rights organization that helps immigrants in the community. (Planned for March, 2019) • One 2-hour session on how to support students with issues of cultural adjustment and second language learning. (Planned for April 2019). • One 2-hour session on awareness of gangs and how to keep your child safe and warning signs of bullying. (Planned for May, 2019). The parent coordinator plays an integral role in acting as a liaison between the parents and the school. The parent coordinator is responsible to reach out to all parents to publicize the school's parental involvement activities. The parent coordinator sends out written notifications about parental activities in the parents' preferred home language and also sends home messages via the telephone messenger in parents' preferred home languages. The parent coordinator also works in conjunction with the school PTA and individual parents to gauge the types of activities they would like to have available to participate in throughout the school year. In addition, the parent coordinator acts as an ombudsman between parents and their students individual classroom teachers to help arrange meetings and make contact keeping the lines of communication open. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jaclyn Valane, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: International HS @LaGuardia School DBN: 24Q530 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jaclyn Valane Harry Schutz Blanca Loria Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Carol Tureski ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Farro Parent Amy Burrous/English Teacher/Subject Area Allison McCluer/Science Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Coach Coach Theon McGhie School Counselor Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Jocelyn Santana Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Affinity Group FSC ELL Services Coordinator Joelle Lobberect Vecsey Other ENL Teacher n/a n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 n/a n/a 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 06/23/17 n/a n/a 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q530 School Name: International HS at LaGuardia Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Blanca Loria Parent Coordinator YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data used to access our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs include data found from a variety of sources. The parent surveys and parent selection forms gathered from student permanent records and from those filled out by parents when students entering the NYC schools for the first time as well as information gathered from Part III of the Home Language Survey (HLIS) are very useful. In addition we use ATS reports such as the RAPL report in ATS which is helpful in determining parents' preferred languages, the PARD report provides information on parent’s preferred written and oral languages. The Student Emergency Contact cards are another source which can be used to confirm parents preferred written and spoken languages. The parent surveys are useful in determined parents needs such as a desire to attend English language classes. The data found in the Language Allocation Policy is useful in helping us to determine how to spend our translations funding and what languages are needed for written translations as well as when we need to send school messenger calls over the phone. The policy of International High School is to provide all parents with written translation and oral interpretations through all means available to us. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Armenian Arabic Bengla Burmese Chinese Dari Dzongkha English Filipino French-Haitian-Creole French Fulani German Hindi Korean Mandarin Nahuatl Nepali Pilipino Punjabi Polish Portuguese Russian Senufo Spanish Tamazight Thai Tibetan Tadzhik Urdu Ukrainian Uzbek 2 35 58 1 20 1 1 102 8 5 8 0 2 1 1 0 1 9 5 3 6 8 25 1 428 1 3 13 0 6 2 12 0.26 4.61% 7.64% 0.13% 2.64% 0.13% 0.13% 2 31 60 1 19 1 1 0.26 4.08% 7.91% 0.13% 2.5% 0.13% 0.13% 13.44% 101 13.31% 1.04% 0.66% 1.04% 0% 0.26% 0.13% 0.13% 0% 0.13 1.19% 0.66 0.4% 0.79% 1.05% 3.29% 0.13% 56.39% 0.13% 0.4% 1.71% 0% 0.79% 0.26% 1.58% 7 5 8 0 3 2 1 1 1 9 5 3 6 7 25 1 429 0 3 14 1 7 2 11 0.91% 0.66% 1.04% 0% 0.4% 0.26% 0.13% 0.13% 0.13 1.19% 0.66 0.4% 0.79% 0.92% 3.29% 0.13% 56.52% 0% 0.4% 1.84% 0.13% 0,92% 0.26% 1.45% 3  Vietnamese 1 0.13% 1 0.13% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NONE Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families June-September New parent handbook Parent-teacher conference announcements- Early September, Mid-October, Early March, Mid-April. Info letter regarding New York State Regents testing dates Early January and Early June. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We plan to utilize the Translation Unit for all the major languages that they translate. We will utilize in-house staff members who speak a particular language whenever possible and then we will utilize the services of an outside vendor to cover the remainder of the languages we are not able to cover either through the translation unit or through our in-house staff. We plan to utilize the Translation Unit for all the major languages that they translate. We will utilize in-house staff members who speak a particular language whenever possible and then we will utilize the services of an outside vendor to cover the remainder of the languages we are not able to cover either through the translation unit or through our in-house staff. We plan to utilize the Translation Unit for all the major languages that they translate. We will utilize in-house staff members who speak a particular language whenever possible and then we will utilize the services of an outside vendor to cover the remainder of the languages we are not able to cover 4  PTA announcements-Monthly. Approximately the 15th of each month. We plan to utilize the Translation either through the translation unit or through our in-house staff. Orientation letter to new students- Early July and early August. March credit letter and summer school credit/class information. Mid-March. Notification letter for first day of school Approximately August 15th. Notification letter for new parent orientation -September and February Unit for all the major languages that they translate. We will utilize in-house staff members who speak a particular language whenever possible and then we will utilize the services of an outside vendor to cover the remainder of the languages we are not able to cover either through the translation unit or through our in-house staff. We plan to utilize the Translation Unit for all the major languages that they translate. We will utilize in-house staff members who speak a particular language whenever possible and then we will utilize the services of an outside vendor to cover the remainder of the languages we are not able to cover either through the translation unit or through our in-house staff. We plan to utilize the Translation Unit for all the major languages that they translate. We will utilize in-house staff members who speak a particular language whenever possible and then we will utilize the services of an outside vendor to cover the remainder of the languages we are not able to cover either through the translation unit or through our in-house staff. We plan to utilize the Translation Unit for all the major languages that they translate. We will utilize in-house staff members who speak a particular language whenever possible and then we will utilize the services of an outside vendor to cover the remainder of the languages we are not able to cover either through the translation unit or through our in-house staff. We plan to utilize the Translation Unit for all the major languages that they translate. We will utilize in-house staff members who speak a particular language whenever 5  PTA Parent Newsletter Approximately the 15th of each month. We plan to utilize the Translation possible and then we will utilize the services of an outside vendor to cover the remainder of the languages we are not able to cover either through the translation unit or through our in-house staff. Unit for all the major languages that they translate. We will utilize in-house staff members who speak a particular language whenever possible and then we will utilize the services of an outside vendor to cover the remainder of the languages we are not able to cover either through the translation unit or through our in-house staff. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences 9/26/18, 11/28/18, 11/29/18, 3/6/19, 3/7/19. Family Night 5/10/19 PTA meetings- Monthly Early College Meeting December Individual meetings with parents of all ENL students Throughout the year. New Parent Orientation Last week in August and early February. interpretation service(s)? In House staff translators and the over the phone translation unit will be utilized as needed for all of these events. In House staff translators and the over the phone translation unit will be utilized as needed for all of these events. In House staff translators and the over the phone translation unit will be utilized as needed for all of these events. In House staff translators and the over the phone translation unit will be utilized as needed for all of these events. In House staff translators and the over the phone translation unit will be utilized as needed for all of these events. In House staff translators and the over the phone translation unit will be utilized as needed for all of these events. 6  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency we will utilize our telephone call messenger service to reach out to the parents in a variety of languages to meet the needs of all of our parents. This telephone call messenger service allows us to leave messages for parents in their native languages regarding any emergency. It also allows us to send texts messages in the parents preferred language to those parents who have provided us with a text number. In the event of a school emergency we can also reach out to our parents utilizing the Translation Unit phone translation services. In the event of a school emergency we will utilize our phone messenger service to reach out to the parents in a variety of languages to meet the needs of all of our parents. This telephone machine also allows us to leave text messages for parents in many of their preferred native languages when they share their cell phone numbers. In addition International High School at LaGuardia utilizes a wide variety of strategies in order to provide oral interpretation services to reach out to our parents should any emergency situation develop. In-House: We are fortunate to have a staff of teachers, counselors, school aides, educational paraprofessional, plus our parent coordinator and community coordinator many of whom speak at least two and often three languages who can help reach out to parents in an emergency. The languages spoken by staff members include: Spanish, Chinese, Polish, Bengali, Urdu, Haitian-Creole, Portuguese, French Arabic, Russian. We would also reach out to the DOE Translation Unit if we do not have the resources in a particular language in order to obtain an oral interpretation over the telephone to reach parents in any emergency. Our school has a website where we are able to leave inportant messages for parents in a variety of languages. Finally, when necessary we can reach out to many of our parents via email when they have provided us with an email address. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. As per Chancellor's Regulation A-663, International High School at LaGuardia will ensure that all staff members are aware of how to use translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation services through a variety of methods. All staff will receive the T&I Brochure and a copy of the Language ID Guide as well as instruction in how to reach out to obtain over-the-phone interpretation services as well as how to get a document translated by the Translation Unit during our staff professional development session in September. In addition, the staff T&I Brochure and Language ID Guide will be will be distributed to all staff via email. We will plan to schedule a professional development session as part of a staff meeting on best ways to utilize translations and interpretation services when reaching out to parents. 7  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) International High School takes the responsibility of providing each parent with written translation and oral interpretation services extremely seriously. Every effort is made to ensure that parents whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services in the appropriate covered receive those services as well as instructions on how to obtain such services. -When a parent enters the school they are greeted by a parent welcome poster conspicuously posted outside the main office. -When a parent enters the main office a language ID guide is clearly posted at the security desk as well as in the main office. -At the new parent orientation meetings in August and February parents are provided with the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Copies of the guide are also distributed to parents at the four parent conferences throughout the school year. In addition, copies of the guide are posted in the main office where translations are made available as needed. -Notification to our parents is made in a variety of ways. Our parent coordinator provides monthly newsletters in all the covered languages as well as in a variety of primary languages providing notification of their rights. This information is also provided to parents at several points throughout the year. The Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselors hold an orientation for new parents twice a year in August and in February through the Parent Association which informs parents of their rights in terms of translation and interpretation services. Translators are provided at each of these meetings. The information is also provided to parents through our telephone messenger system which sends out the messages in a variety of languages. Parents are also informed of the translation and translation services at all four parent teacher conferences held in September, November, March and in May. • The information is to be posted in a conspicuous location near the primary entrance to the high school in the covered languages. This notification indicates that a copy of the written notification of the parent’s Bill of Rights regarding language assistance services and translation services are available from the Parent Coordinator in the main office, room 152. • International High School’s safety plan will contain procedures in order to ensure that parents in need of language assistance services are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. • “Each school at which the parents of more than 10% of the children at such school speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language shall obtain from the Translation and interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required pursuant to this section and shall post and provide such forms in accordance with this section.” At International High School the only languages spoken by over 10% of the students are covered languages. (Spanish and Chinese). • International High School will provide information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services and how to access such services on its school website. 8  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services the school will assess the answers parents provide in the school survey about whether or not the school is communicating with the parent in their native language. Parents who attend monthly PTA meeting will be asked to provide feedback on how well the school is providing parents with both written and oral translation services. In addition, whenever our parent coordinator communicates with parents she will request feedback on ways to improve communication and availability of translation services. 9 
