 30Q575 School Name: ACADEMY OF AMERICAN STUDIES Principal: WILLIAM BASSELL   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Academy of American Studies 343000011575 School Number (DBN): 30Q575 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 9-12 School Address: 28-04 41 st Avenue Phone Number: 718-433-2556 Fax: Fax: 718-361-8832 School Contact Person: Nina Cohen Email Address: Ncohen4@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: William C. Bassell Doug Condon Parents’ Association President: RosinaMorales; Yolanda Odio-Tasso SLT Chairperson: Nina Cohen Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): N/A Student Representative(s): Sophia Rodriguez - Senior CBO Representative: Liana Hitts - Junior N/A District Information Geographical District: 30 Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Elaine Lindsey Superintendent’s Office Address: Flushing,New York 11354 Superintendent’s Email Address: ELindse@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-281-3517 Fax: 718-281-3517 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Queens North Executive Director: Lawrence Pendergast Executive Director’s Office Address: 28-11 Queens Plaza North – Long Island City, New York 11101 Executive Director’s Email Address: lpender@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 917-225-2020 Fax: 718-391-8320   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) William C. Bassell *Principal or Designee Doug Condon RosinaMorales/Yolanda Odio-Tasso Patricia McLoughlin N/A Sophia Rodriguez Liana Hitts N/A Nina Cohen James Randle Toby Incantalupo John Dietrich Tracey Morse-Garcia *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Assistant Principal Member/ Teacher Member/ UFT Secretary Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Ana Ovalle Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to prepare today’s students for tomorrow’s challenges by providing strategic insights into America’s rich history.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Academy of American Studies is a college preparatory high school emphasizing American history, literature, and culture through four years of American studies. We strive to build a cooperative community of life-long college and career learners through a spirited partnership among students, parents, faculty, staff and educational partners. Our instructional focus is for all students to learn, grow and take ownership of their academic development in a rigorous and structured environment. We achieve this through an emphasis on writing, critical thinking skills, problem solving, and the promotion of clear and actionable next steps for each student. Our school was created in partnership with the Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History, and as a result, our students are given extra American History classes each year. This helps our students develop a deeper understanding of our country and their place in it. As well, it helps students develop critical thinking skills and provides an excellent backdrop for interdisciplinary work. Our students visit sites of historic importance such as Gettysburg, Washington D.C., Boston, Philadelphia and New England. These trips bring the rich history they study to life as they re-enact Pickett's charge or travel back in time during their visit to Plymouth Plantation. Each of these experiences inform their work in class and in college. Our goals are to ensure that every student has a rigorous college and career preparatory experience, to support every student in earning a minimum of ten academic credits each school year and to enrich and enhance students’ curricular and co-curricular experiences through our partnerships with the Gilder Lehrman Institute and other supporting organizations. Through a partnership with “Theatre for a New Audience” two of our ICT classes and their teachers will be involved with a program called the “World Theatre Project’ to provide their students academic understanding through artistic expression. We will have a new partnership this year with the Intrepid Museum for our 11th grade U. S. History students that will link with their study of the Vietnam War. We have additional partnerships with the Metropolitan Opera at Lincoln Center, the 92nd Street Y, the New York State Theatre Education Association, MoMA, The Noguchi Museum which include teaching artists working with students and teachers in the classroom and visits to readings and museums. We held our History Fair again this year where our students presented posterboards, documentaries, and a myriad of presentations on a variety of historical topics. This new tradition will continue in the 2018-2019 school year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have English Language Learners and Special Education students who have a range of needs. Our English Language Learners come from a variety of countries and have a myriad of skills and abilities. This can range from intermediate newcomer students to advanced students, as well as proficient students who still receive services. Our current program for ELL’s provides instruction in line with the common core and is planned to help students meet the requirements of the NYSESLAT test and their other courses. Our special education students range from alternate assessment students to students with visual or hearing impairments or students who might require more frequent one on one meetings with teachers. We also have general education students who may be struggling academically. Through our arts partnerships as mentioned above, strong ICT teams, and a SETTS class with two teachers (one special education teacher and one general education teacher), our teachers work collaboratively to meet the needs of these students. Our teachers work to empower all students to take ownership of their learning, they work to make real world connections, use differentiation, peer to peer teaching, and provide opportunities for student generated questions and reflection. Teachers use formative assessment and provide multiple entry points to reinforce student skills. Our goal is for all students to be critical thinkers who are prepared for college. We also have an online system called “Apex Learning” to assist with credit accumulation and academic support. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The areas where we made the most progress this year incorporate all of the elements of the Framework for Great Schools. As part of our focus on collaborative teaching and rigorous instruction, we continued our collaboration with the TLP. We also created time for what we called our Danielson Deep Dive. During this time teachers chose areas of practice related to the Danielson rubric and based on their observation feedback that needed refinement. They worked together to examine these areas and make change in their practice.   As part of our focus on creating a supportive environment we shifted from our Kid Talk program to one called Project ECHO (Every Child Has Opportunities). This required that every teacher as part of their everyday responsibilities participated in a specific mentoring relationship with a few of their students. As part of Project ECHO, staff members chose one to two students to mentor/support during the school year. The purpose of Project ECHO was to support the student academically, but also socially and emotionally. Teacher mentors served as supports to the students and their colleagues. The Give program continued their outreach to the families of students who were in danger of not graduating. In terms of our focus on collaborative teachers and rigorous instruction, there was a PD team that met regularly throughout the year. They were a team made up mostly of teachers and one administrator. They determined how we spent our Wednesday common planning time so we could have greater teacher buy in and voice in planning and process. Our key areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year from the Framework for Great Schools are Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers and Rigorous Instruction. As part of our continuing focus to create a supportive environment, we will continue Project ECHO. Through this program, we will target specific students who need additional academic and social emotional support and pair them with a teacher/mentor throughout the school year for support, organizational help and overall mentoring needs. In terms of our focus on collaborative teachers and rigorous instruction, we have Wednesday professional blocks throughout the year where our primary focus will be to sustain ongoing forms of professional learning that support individual, department based and whole school initiatives that align to our school's instructional and cultural goals. As well, we will focus on inquiry that is paired with common planning. During strategically planned times throughout the year, teachers will work within their vertical department teams to engage in inquiry work and other professional learning. Teachers will examine subject specific data to make adjustments in instruction to advance the academic growth of their students. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 30Q575 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1038 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 10 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 15 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 57.7% % Reduced Lunch 3.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 34.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 35.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.07 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 96% 93% 92.1% 55.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES No N/A 96 102 4 93.4% 10.9% 8.7% 4.9% 24.7% 0.5% 8 9% 8.7 N/A N/A 95% 94% 95.5% 63% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment: The area of focus from our Quality Review school quality report was in area 1.2: Develop teacher pedagogy from a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. According to our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 83% responded positively to questions about rigorous instruction. The city is at 79% and the Borough is at 80%, but we would still like to see this grow. According to our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 65% of teachers say that students build on each other’s ideas during class discussions. Although this is 64% for the city, we would like to see growth in this area. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 78% of students say that they are learning a lot in their classes to prepare them for the next level or grade. We would like to see growth in this area. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 73% of students say that their classes at their school make them think critically. We would like to see growth in this area. Areas of Strength: An area of celebration in our 2017-2018 Quality Review was our observation of teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. An area of celebration in our 2017-2018 PPO was 3.4: Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families and provide supports to achieve those expectations. As of June 26th, 2018, we had a 97% graduation rate this school year, the highest in our school’s history. There were 241 students in the cohort, of which 75 received Regents Diplomas, 153 received Advanced Regents Diplomas, and 7 received Local Diplomas. 2  According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 94% of our 9th and 10th grade students earned enough credits in their grade to be on track for graduation. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 100% of our teachers for all subjects say that they had the resources and tools needed to include opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level texts. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 97% of teachers say that students feel challenged. Areas for improvement: To ensure teachers plan more opportunities for students to engage in high level discourse throughout a 79 minute period. To ensure that teachers continue to receive professional learning on how to create rigorous tasks. To work on to help students build upon the ideas of their peers in class discussions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our teachers will participate in professional learning sessions and cycles that will impact upon increasing rigorous practices in their classrooms and then implement change. This will be measured by regularly examining evidence and monitoring the impact of this work throughout the year. Our goal is to build capacity in instruction through strategically organized professional learning cycles that align to and support the school's instructional focus. This is a shared commitment among teachers and administration. This will lead to improved instructional practices and result in academic growth for all students. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will share best practices and lesson plans that show rigor in both department meetings and inquiry team meetings. All teachers Sept. 12 - June 8 Assistant Principals Team members All teachers October 10 - Assistant Principals June 5 Professional Development Team All departments with the exception of Math All teachers November 1 - June 5 Assistant Principals Sept. 12-June 5 Assistant Principals We have created a professional development team made up primarily of teachers. They are determining together what areas they believe they most need assistance in to increase rigor in our school. They will then use their expertise in these areas to teach each other strategies and tools for teaching, planning, grading and implementing lessons. In some cases, they may reach out to outside organizations to share their knowledge as well. Through distributive leadership practices, administration, teacher leaders and teachers will attend professional learning series courses and become scheduled to deliver that learning to their department or other staff members as relevant to instructional practices. Administrative Walk-Throughs: During periodically scheduled times throughout the year the administration will conduct non-evaluative walk-throughs in between formally established observation cycles. This system is in place to provide ongoing feedback to teachers in a supportive and non-evaluative way to have more frequent and regular forms of feedback to improve instructional practices and shifts. Walk-throughs will allow us to gather observation data across several classrooms to identify patterns and trends and then share what we learn with the staff as a whole. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will share our plans for increasing rigor during our summer orientation for new students and parents as well as during PTA meetings monthly throughout the school year. This will include information and presentations by students, teachers, administrators, and outside organizations. The assistant principals will be responsible for 4  implementation and oversight. We will explore involving parents to share their stories of their children's academic success at our school with rigor. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our teachers will meet in department teams on Wednesday afternoons. They also have office hours to meet with students and self-directed professional time on Wednesdays. There is also admin. assigned other professional work (one Wednesday per month) and cycles of inquiry throughout the year. Our schedule was adjusted to incorporate this kind of time for teacher collaboration and student support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We are creating on a calendar which will include time on Wednesdays as part of an overall cycle of monitoring progress and continual improvement to choose target students, hold conferences with parents, and plan changes in classroom practice as well as opportunities for reflecting and sharing progress. Our midpoint checkpoint will be in February 2019 to review progress towards meeting the annual goal and to make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable at that time. We will do this by sharing changed lesson plans and best practices they have implemented highlighting how their practice has changed as a result of their work during designated department meetings/professional development sessions. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will examine student work and data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Supportive Environment: In our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 42% of students say that teachers support them when they are upset. We would like to see growth in this area. In our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 70% responded positively to questions about supportive environment. We would like to see growth in this area. We received a rating of proficient on our Quality Review under school culture for 1.4: Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. We would like to see a well developed rating in this area. In our 2016-2017 School Quality Guide we had a 51% positive response to the area of personal attention and support, while the city average was 61%. We would like to see growth in this area. Areas of strength: - Big Sib program - Guidance meetings - Leadership - Respect for all presentations - Anti-bullying presentations facilitated by students - The Whole Student PD’s run by guidance - Regular teacher/guidance and attendance outreach to parents - Pupil Path - Planned social events and community service events - ECHO 6  - Apex – We invited students in on the weekend for extra hours and called homes on Saturday mornings to bring them in. - New website with more interactive 2-way communication features. -New peer tutoring program. Areas for improvement: As a result of conversations with students and an incident of racial bias, we scheduled workshops with the Anti-Defamation League to focus on bias. There will be workshops for students as well as teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our teachers will engage in reflective practices to examine how to improve school culture and instruction based on studying the responses from student panel discussions and surveys on these issues. This will be measured by regularly examining evidence and monitoring the impact of this work throughout the year. The student panel discussions will be scheduled three times per year. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? At risk/ Struggling students in all grades. Sept. 12-June 5 Assistant Principals Guidance Counselors Team Members Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). As part of our focus on creating a supportive environment we will continue our Project ECHO (Every Child Has Opportunities) program. As part of Project ECHO staff members choose one to two students to mentor/support during the school year. The purpose of Project ECHO is to support the student academically, but also socially and emotionally. Teacher mentors will serve as supports to the students and their colleagues. The students targeted for ECHO will include struggling students, some of whom are students with disabilities and /or English Language Learners. Roles and responsibilities would include: · If a teacher is having any issue with a student they can go to the mentor teacher to discuss it. The mentor teacher would reach out to the ECHO and discuss the issues in the classroom. · Mentor teacher can have close contact with families. · The mentor teacher will create a schedule to meet with the ECHO student often and touch base on any concerns or difficulties. Meetings will be at least once a month and can be scheduled on Wednesday’s from 12-1 or 1:00-1:40. Some students may require more frequent check- ins that is up to the discretion of the teacher. · Teachers can start with one and can add a student as the school year goes on. · The student that is chosen as the ECHO does not have to be someone they are teaching that school year, it can be a student they taught in the past. Project ECHO will cast a wider net of students that can be positively impacted by an adult at this school. Students need to know that they have been chosen as an ECHO by a mentor teacher. A spreadsheet of mentor teacher and ECHO students 8 will be distributed to every staff member. Administrators can also choose an ECHO student to mentor. We would like to continue the Senior Graduation Tracker process with the 12 th grade inquiry team members and the Deans office through their Give program acting as mentors to a specific cohort of seniors in order to assist in their progress toward graduation. The targeted students would be struggling students, some of whom are students with disabilities and/or English Language Learners. Part of the process will be to invite parents in as partners in our outreach. We will refine the process from last year to further streamline it. Based on the results of our School Quality Snapshot, we will continue our initiative to focus on at risk students with particular attention to the lowest third. We will use the DOE’s Progress to Graduation Tracker, as well as guidance and deans information to identify students (general education students/special education students and ELL’s) who are almost on track, off track and at risk in order to provide further guidance to the students and their families. This will take place on Wednesdays during our SBO voted self-directed professional time and at times during more formal Wednesday afternoon sessions. Anti-Defamation League: We will have a peer training program which will train approximately 30 student leaders to become ADL student facilitators to turnkey lessons that they learn with their peers. The program is 3 days for students. They will learn to examine and challenge bias in themselves and others. Each participant will receive a manual of ADL activities and helpful tips and strategies for peer to peer facilitation. The training for staff is one day. At risk/ Struggling seniors Sept. 2- June 5 Mark Solkoff and Brian Mayer Guidance Counselors Team Members AT risk/ Struggling Students Students and Staff Sept. 12 – June 5 3 days for students – dates to be determined. Staff training on election day Assistant Principals Guidance Counselors Give Team Members Students Assistant Principals Guidance Counselors Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will share our plans for continuing to create a supportive environment in our school during our summer orientation for new students and parents as well as during PTA meetings monthly throughout the school year. This will include information and presentations by students, teachers, administrators, and outside organizations. The assistant principals will be responsible for implementation and oversight. We will explore involving parents to share their stories of their children's social emotional success at our school with as a result of our supportive environment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our teachers will meet in department teams on Wednesday afternoons. They also have office hours to meet with students and self-directed professional time on Wednesdays. There is also admin. assigned other professional work 9  (one Wednesday per month) and cycles of inquiry throughout of the year. Our schedule was adjusted to incorporate this kind of time for teacher collaboration and student support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We are creating on a calendar which will include time on Wednesdays as part of an overall cycle of monitoring progress and continual improvement to choose target students, hold conferences with parents, and plan changes in classroom practice as well as opportunities for reflecting and sharing progress. Our midpoint checkpoint will be in February 2019 to review progress towards meeting the annual goal and to make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable at that time. We will do this by monitoring changes in student performance as a result of ECHO during the fall semester. Each teacher/student team will create opportunities based on the student's schedule that will enable periodic meetings throughout the Fall. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will examine student work and data. This will include student progress on class exams, quizzes, and projects, in addition to conversations with teachers about in class participation and behavior as well as report card grades. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Collaborative Teachers: According to our PPO Feedback, we need to work with our community to support all teachers in engaging in inquiry on a more consistent basis. In terms of inquiry, we also need to ensure teachers use data to identify a problem of practice before moving through the inquiry cycle. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 78% of teachers say they had opportunities to work productively with their colleagues at their school on professional development. Although this increased from 64% the previous year, we would like to see growth in this area. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 67% of teachers say that their professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try and evaluate new ideas. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 74% of teachers say that teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching. Areas of Strength: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 94% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction. -Wednesday schedule -Distributive leadership on teams -A PD team made up mostly of teachers who are in charge of planning for PD in 2018-2019. -Administrators and guidance counselors may participate in meetings, but this is not mandatory as the goal is for this to be teacher run. -Teachers share best practices -We had teacher run PD’s and had people come in to do PD on areas including mental health, How students learn best, promethean training, Accommodating the Introverted Learner and more. 1  Areas for improvement: -To move the inquiry process to the department. Each team will develop their own theory of action for their professional learning. - To refine our structures for our time on Wednesdays to address the needs mentioned above. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 100% of our teachers will participate in the creation and implementation of new systems and structures for sharing best practices with each other, and then implementing those practices in the classroom. This will be measured by regularly monitoring for evidence of impact, through observations and by reflecting on implementation. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our school is planning to participate in the 2018-2019 Teacher Leadership Program. The TLP is designed to challenge and support teacher leaders across the city in developing the content knowledge and facilitative leadership skills needed to guide instructional improvements in schools. Participating teachers will lead and support their colleagues in collaborative learning, have tools to engage in reflective practices to improve instruction, have learned and practiced facilitation protocols for effective goal-setting, problem–solving, and reflective practices related to teacher and student work. They will maintain a portfolio demonstrating work they have facilitated. Part of this work will be about how to best address the needs of struggling students, students with disabilities, and English Language Learners. They will develop an area of focus when they begin work together in the fall. The PD team developed a new protocol for our teacher team meetings next year. At the start of the school year in September, all staff will receive a professional learning session on inquiry and its objective purpose for the school year. This will outline the expected process that will occur for each teacher team from October through April. Then each team will be given time to construct a theory of action, a rationale, an action plan with a SMART goal and intended outcome or impact expected from the process. Team Building: One week of every month will be set aside for team building PD for the staff. The responsibility for creating and running the PD will switch between the teachers and the administrators. The staff is being surveyed to determine areas of interest for those team building activities. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? October 8 to June 5 Teachers from the Foreign Language, Math, English and Social Studies Departments. Joanne Black and Team Members Julissa Duran, Maribel Agudelo, Lindsay Lin, Danrong Huang, Emily Glosser and Ali Dorfman. All teachers September 12 to June 5 PD team and Assistant Principals All teachers September 12 to June 5 PD team and Assistant Principals How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will share our plans for continuing to create a collaborative environment in our school during our summer orientation for new students and parents as well as during PTA meetings monthly throughout the school year. This 3  will include information and presentations by students, teachers, administrators, and outside organizations. The assistant principals and the PD team will be responsible for implementation and oversight. We will explore involving parents to share their stories of working collaboratively with our school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our teachers meet in either grade or department teams on Wednesday afternoons. They also have office hours to meet with students and self-directed professional time on Wednesdays. There is also admin. Assigned other professional work (one Wednesday per month) and cycles of inquiry throughout the year. Our schedule was adjusted to incorporate this kind of time for teacher collaboration and student support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our Wednesday calendar allows for PD, Inquiry and team building in cycles that will allow for this new system. This was created with staff members who chose to participate in the Wednesday Committee and they will share with the staff information about what will be expected of them each week during our Wednesday common planning time in advance. The calendar may change when necessary, but currently it is as follows for the Fall: 9/5 Department Meetings, Teacher Developed PD, Other Professional work, 9/12 Faculty Meetings, Admin. Developed PD: Inquiry Overview/Planning for 2018-2019, 9/26 Professional Development teacher constructed – Tech/promethean training – Inquiry by department, 10/3 Team building Admin. Constructed/Other Professional Work – teacher directed, 10/10 Department meetings, Professional Development – Admin. Constructed: Instructional Planning: Designing Instruction Danielson 1E & 3C, Inquiry by Department – initial review of student work, 10/17 PD Teacher constructed /OPW teacher directed, 10/24 Faculty Meetings/Inquiry by Department revie progress/plan strategies, 10/31 PD Admin. Constructed – Instructional planning part 2 Danielson focus 1E, OPW teacher directed, 11/7 ECHO share out. 11/21 inquiry mid cycle review, 12/12 Inquiry by department – review student work and identify goals, 1/9 Inquiry by department Mid year reflection, 2/13 Inquiry by department – review student work, construct instructional shifts, discuss intervisitation feedback, 3/20 Inquiry by Department Mid-cycle benchmark, 4/14 Inquiry by Department – student work, instructional shifts, evaluate goals, 5/15 Inquiry by department – short term objectives for end of year with skill support for state exams in June, 6/6 Chancellor’s PD Day – teams meet to evaluate, reflect and plan for the next year. We are continuing to schedule tasks for the calendar as we move through the year, but the structure of department meetings, faculty meetings, team building, other professional work, Inquiry and professional development (both teacher and admin. constructed will remain throughout). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will examine student work and data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have 1 teacher who will be new to our school in the 2018-2019 school year and 4 teachers who will be returning for just their second year with us. It is our goal to make this transition as seamless as possible for them. As well, we will have one guidance counselor who will be new to our school and one guidance counselor who has only been with us for a few months. They will each require a different amount of support. In addition to the mentors some of them will have, it is important that the Principal develops a strong relationship with them and that he and the Assistant Principals can learn from their observations how they can best assist each teacher and guidance counselor. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Principal, William C. Bassell, will observe 100% of the teachers who are new to the school to monitor instruction and provide support. This will be measured using the Danielson rubric as evidenced by entries in "Advance". The Assistant Principals will also be observing these teachers and they will work in concert with the Principal to assist them and support their growth. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Principal will observe new teachers in their classrooms and share his feedback with the teachers as well as their Assistant Principals New Teachers to the school September 2018 - May 2019 William C. Bassell The Assistant Principals will observe new teachers in their classrooms and share their feedback with the teachers as well as with the Principal. New Teachers to the school September 2018-May 2019 All Assistant Principals NA NA 3b – Parent and Family Engagement NA NA NA NA NA NA How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Mr. Bassell, the Principal, will share plans for increasing Effective School Leadership during our summer orientation for new students and parents as well as during PTA meetings monthly throughout the school year. This will include information on working with the new teachers in our school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Principal will observe the new teachers during their class periods and he will conference with them when necessary during our Wednesday professional time or other appropriate times. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Principal will be monitoring the progress of the new teachers in conferences with the Assistant Principals and by reviewing the observations conducted by the Assistant Principals. By February 2019, each teacher new to the school will have been observed by the Principal in addition to their ongoing observations by the Assistant Principals based on the DOE schedule. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Formal and informal observations conducted using the Danielson rubric and entered in "Advance". Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 School Guide, 83% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 95% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 83% of families say that they are likely to attend a general school meeting or event. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have made outreach to 100% of our parents through Parent Engagement events, Parent Teacher Conferences, Meet the Teacher night, ECHO, Student Recognition Ceremonies, Guidance Counselor Contact, Phone Dialer and Pupil Path. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Throughout the school year, parents will be fully informed of events and opportunities at the Academy of American Studies by phone calls using the School Messenger Service, through visiting our new website at www.academyofamericanstudies.com and through email messages through Pupilpath. Parents Mark Solkoff September 2018-May 2019 By May 2019, the Academy of American Studies mentor teachers will provide outreach and academic support to targeted students and parents. Students and Parents October 2018-May 2019 Meet the Teacher Night Informal Meetings with Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students and Parents September 26th Students and Parents Throughout the year based on the parent's schedules PD Team, Assistant Principals, Teachers and Guidance Counselors Principal, Assistant Principals Teachers and Guidance Counselors Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers and Guidance Counselors. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will share our plans for continuing to create a strong family and community ties during our summer orientation for new students and parents as well as during PTA meetings monthly throughout the school year. This will include information and presentations by students, teachers, administrators, and outside organizations. The assistant principals will be responsible for implementation and oversight. We will explore involving parents to share their stories of their ties to our school with as a result of our ongoing work with them. Some of the organizations with whom we work that encourage parent involvement include MoMA, The Met Opera, The Noguchi Museum, The Gilder Lerhman Institute for American History and the 92nd Street Y. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0  Various Evening and Early morning events throughout the school year as well as during designated Wednesday professional time. Our schedule was adjusted to incorporate this kind of time for parent/student support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our midpoint checkpoint will be in February 2019 to review progress towards meeting the annual goal and to make adjustments to the action plan at that time if necessary. We will examine how many parents are attending our events, comparing them to previous years. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will examine parent attendance at events and student progress in class and parent communication since starting ECHO. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All 10 th grade students who are over age and under credited. Students who need English to graduate. Regents Prep. Repeated Readings Small group, one to one tutoring During the school day or after school. Teacher offices Make-up Wednesdays Students Sharing Best Practices Apex Online Learning Time for make-up assignments Second year classes to build skills and stamina APEX Online Learning RegentsPrep. Small group, one to one tutoring Repeated Readings Teacher offices Mathematics Appropriately identified students in Regents Math classes. Students who need Math credits to graduate. Students Sharing Best Practices Apex Online Learning Students who enter Academy who were struggling in Math in Junior High School. APEX Online learning in the classroom and at home or during Wednesday office hours. Weekend tutorials prior to Regents and AP exams. During the school day or after school. Make-up Wednesdays APEX learning in the classroom and at home or during Wednesday office hours.Weekend tutorials prior to Regents and AP exams. 2  Science Time for make-up assignments Second year classes to build skills and stamina APEX Online Learning Regents Prep. Repeated Readings Students Sharing Appropriately identified students in Regents Science classes. Students who need Science credits to graduate. Students in need of make-up labs. Best Practices Time for make-up assignments Small group, one to one tutoring During the school day or after school. Teacher offices Apex Online Learning Second year classes to build skills and stamina Make-up Wednesdays APEX learning in the classroom and at home or during Wednesday office hours. Weekend tutorials prior to Regents and AP exams. Social Studies Appropriately identified students in Regents social studies classes. Students who need Social Studies credits to graduate. APEX Online Learning Regents Prep. Small group, one to one tutoring During the school day or after school. Repeated Readings Teacher offices Apex Online Learning Students Sharing Best Practices Make-up Wednesdays APEX learning in the classroom andat home or during Wednesday office hours. Weekend tutorials prior to Regents and AP exams. Time for make-up assignments APEX OnlineLearning Mandated Counseling At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Mandated students At-Risk students Second year classes to build skills and stamina Small group, one to one During the school day or after school. 3  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students in crisis College bound students Small Group Counseling Teacher and Counselor office hours College Prep. Mental Health Services andprograms 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5 In conjunction with guidance support, supplies such as backpacks, notebooks, paper, pens, pencils, etc. are distributed to targeted students on an as needed basis. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 7  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local NA NA NA NA NA 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 8  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Academy of American Studies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students the Academy of American Studies will support parents and families of appropriately designated Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 0  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The Academy of American Studies' Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 1  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Academy of American Studies, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 3  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 4  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Rationale:In order to best support our ELL students we used data from the School Quality Begin description here: · Guide.&nbsp; Based on the data our overall 4-Year Graduation Rate is 91% but our 4-Year Garduation Rate for ELL students is at 71%.&nbsp; Although it is above the city average, we feel that we can best assist our ELL students by providing them with supplemental &nbsp;College Counseling in addition to regular college advisory all our students receive.&nbsp; ELL students who need to develop a greater understanding of the expectations for gradution and college requirements will have on going Supplemental College Counseling with one of our Guidance Counselors at the school.&nbsp;&nbsp; Because we have a small ELL population we selected all our ELL students to participate in the supplemental College Advisory Program.&nbsp; We hope to familiarize ELL students with the criteria needed to graduate, but also enroll into college.&nbsp; Furthermore, we want to expose our ELL students to the various choices of colleges available to them and even help in the application process for our Seniors.Subgroups and Grade Levels:All our ELL students from grades 9-12 will be served as well as 10 ELL students who also have IEP's.Schedule and Duration:ELL students will meet with the supplemental college adviser throughout the school year.&nbsp; Students will be scheduled by the supplemental college adviser for monthly meetings to discuss progress in credit accumulation and maintenance of averages on transcripts, as well as options for college and entrance criteria.Language of Instruction:EnglishOne Certified Teacher:There will be one Guidance Counselor responsible for the Supplemental College Advisory Program.N/A Rationale: In order to best support our ELL students we used data from the School Quality Guide. Based on the data our overall 4-Year Graduation Rate is 91% but our 4-Year Garduation Rate for ELL students is at 71%. Although it is above the city average, we feel that we can best assist our ELL students by providing them with supplemental College Counseling in addition to regular college advisory all our students receive. ELL students who need to develop a greater understanding of the expectations for gradution and college requirements will have on going Supplemental College Counseling with one of our Guidance Counselors at the school. Because we have a small ELL population we selected all our ELL students to participate in the supplemental College Advisory Program. We hope to familiarize ELL students with the criteria needed to graduate, but also enroll into college. Furthermore, we want to expose our ELL students to the various choices of colleges available to them and even help in the application process for our Seniors. Subgroups and Grade Levels: All our ELL students from grades 9-12 will be served as well as 10 ELL students who also have IEP's. Schedule and Duration: ELL students will meet with the supplemental college adviser throughout the school year. Students will be scheduled by the supplemental college adviser for monthly meetings to discuss progress in credit accumulation and maintenance of averages on transcripts, as well as options for college and entrance criteria. Language of Instruction: English 7 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information One Certified Teacher: There will be one Guidance Counselor responsible for the Supplemental College Advisory Program. The ENL teacher, English teacher, ICT teacher, and content specific teachers will be sent Some examples of PD's that teachers can attend include:Strategic Formative Assessment The ENL teacher attended:Reading, Writing, and Conversing about Race, Gender and rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: · Staff will be asked to attend professional development in order to adopt best practices when lesson and unit planning.&nbsp; These best practices will help to improve the quality of learning for ELL students.&nbsp; Teachers will attend regular PD given throughout the school year about ENL instructional strategies and turn key to staff on Wednesday PD days at school.&nbsp; Through an SBO vote every Wednesday the staff has an afternoon of Professional Development time therefore it is during the regular school day. · out for the various PD's. · of ELLs (6-12) offered on 11/29/17 from 8:30-2:30Scaffolding Writing for Ells (Grades6-12) offered on 11/20 and 11/21Academic Language: Building a Toolkit to Help Students Navigate Complex Texts and Support Academic Discourse offered on 10/20, 11/14, and 12/19. · Identity: Transferring Anti-Bias Concepts and Methods into ELA/ESL Classroom Instruction on 3/22/2018 given by NYCAAPSEThe Time is Now: PropELLing Immigrant Students to be successful in College and Creer Diversity Training on 6/7/2018We will continue to send staff as the calendars of more professional developments become available. · Staff will be asked to attend professional development in order to adopt best practices when lesson and unit planning. These best practices will help to improve the quality of learning for ELL students. Teachers will attend regular PD given throughout the school year about ENL instructional strategies and turn key to staff on Wednesday PD days at school. Through an SBO vote every Wednesday the staff has an afternoon of Professional Development time therefore it is during the regular school day. The ENL teacher, English teacher, ICT teacher, and content specific teachers will be sent out for the various PD's. Some examples of PD's that teachers can attend include: Strategic Formative Assessment of ELLs (6-12) offered on 11/29/17 from 8:30-2:30 Scaffolding Writing for Ells (Grades6-12) offered on 11/20 and 11/21 Academic Language: Building a Toolkit to Help Students Navigate Complex Texts and Support Academic Discourse offered on 10/20, 11/14, and 12/19. The ENL teacher attended: Reading, Writing, and Conversing about Race, Gender and Identity: Transferring Anti-Bias Concepts and Methods into ELA/ESL Classroom Instruction on 3/22/2018 given by NYCAAPSE NYCAAPSE,&nbsp;Queens North Field Support as well as Queens South Field Support 8  Part C: Professional Development The Time is Now: PropELLing Immigrant Students to be successful in College and Creer Diversity Training on 6/7/2018 We will continue to send staff as the calendars of more professional developments become available. NYCAAPSE, Queens North Field Support as well as Queens South Field Support Support parents of ELL students in understanding school wide, state wide and teacher rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: · expectations.&nbsp; We wil also provide parents of ELL students with supplemental information on 4-Year Graduation requirements as well as criteria for students to be able to enter the various colleges available to them.&nbsp; Parents exposure to the information will help them better assist their children at home in order to impact higher achievement toward graduation and college level criteria.Schedule and Duration:These meetings will take place once a month during the SLT and PTA meetings.&nbsp; These meetings are held on a Wednesday of each month in Room 14 South.&nbsp; The scheduled dates for 2017 are 9/13, 10/11, 11/1, 12/1, for 2018 the dates are 1/10, 2/7, 3/14, 4/18, 5/9, and 6/6.&nbsp; Records will be maintained through the use of agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents preferred languages. Support parents of ELL students in understanding school wide, state wide and teacher expectations. We wil also provide parents of ELL students with supplemental information on 4-Year Graduation requirements as well as criteria for students to be able to enter the various colleges available to them. Parents exposure to the information will help them better assist their children at home in order to impact higher achievement toward graduation and college level criteria. Schedule and Duration: These meetings will take place once a month during the SLT and PTA meetings. These meetings are held on a Wednesday of each month in Room 14 South. The scheduled dates for 2017 are 9/13, 10/11, 11/1, 12/1, for 2018 the dates are 1/10, 2/7, 3/14, 4/18, 5/9, and 6/6. Records will be maintained through the use of agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents preferred languages. Dates for the 2018-2019 SLT and PTA meetings have yet to be finalized but tentative dates are available for final selection. The tentative dates are: 9/5, 9/12, 9/19, and 9/26 10/3, 10/10, 10/17, 10/24, and 10/31 11/7, 11/14, 11/21, and 11/28 12/5, 12/12, and 12/19 1/2, 1/9, 1/16, 1/23, and 1/30 2/6, 2/13 , and 2/27 3/6, 3/13, 3/20, and 3/27 4/3, 4/10, and 4/17 5/1, 5/8, 5/15, 5/22, and 5/29 6/5, 6/12, 6/19, and 6/26 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Records will be maintained through the use of agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents preferred languages. We will request translators from the DOE contracted providers. Topics to be covered: School wide, teacher, and state expectations. As well as supplemental information on 4-Year Graduation requirements and criteria for various colleges and their entry requirements. How parents will be notified: Letters home in English and preferred language, Calls, and correspondance via Pupilpath. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. N/A N/A $ 2,473 Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other N/A N/A · · · $ 7,413 $ 1,236 $ 1,236 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A Textbooks, ELL materials as per the SAM School Allocation Memorandum in accordance with SAM Title III CEP Supplemental College N/A N/A · Advisory Support for ENL students. · the school year about ENL instructional strategies and turn key to staff on Wednesday PD days at school. Attend regular PD through 0 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. · Support parents of ELL students in schoolwide, state and teacher expectations so they may better assist their children at home in order to impact higher achievement. Total TOTAL $ 12,366 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 30 School Name Academy of American Studies Borough Queens School Number 575 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal NA Coach Elaine Lindsey ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher 1 Teacher/Subject Area 1 Teacher/Subject Area 0 Related-Service Provider 0 Superintendent 0 Assistant Principal NA Coach type here School Counselor 0 Parent 0 Parent Coordinator 0 Field Support Center Staff Member 0 Other (Name and Title) 1032 C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 31 3.00% Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Total number of ELLs Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions ELLs as share of total student population (%) % 2  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Lang. K 1 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A 4178 2 3 4 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 During the school year the ENL teacher, English teacher and the ICT teacher will create formative assessments accordingly with their lesson plans. The teachers will aslo create end of unit On various days during the school week all the teachers of the ENL class are able to collaborate on the teacher-created assessments. 5 6 7 8 9 We will evaluate our program based on the success of our students, not only when they progress through NYSESLAT levels, but when we see improvement in their skills, in their comfort in classes, in their Once the summative data has been gathered the teachers of the ENL class will then collaborate to create individual plans to addres During the school year the ENL teacher was sent to Professional Development that was targeted instruction of ELL's. The New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) was administered in the spring of 2017 and results are not yet available. However, the ELA Regents results are in for 2017 and sixteen ELL students passed with a 65 or The English AP and the ENL Coordinator view the data available and work with guidance counselors and programming to make adjustments to students For the 2017-2018 school year, there will be 2 Integrated classes, one for students in grades 9 and 10 and one for students in 3  assessments. We do formative assessments across the curriculum in all subject areas to assess and evaluate ELL skill and ability. s the varying needs and areas of weakness for ELL students. higher. Eight out of the programs. sixteen students achieved College Readiness with a 79 or higher. confidence levels when publicly speaking and sharing their ideas, when their grades improve, or when those students who did not previously pass a class, do so. In addition, we examine passing percentages in classes, and growth through ongoing formative and summative assessments and their growth is demonstrated by the baseline exam results. Students will take a beginning of the year, middle of the year and end of year exam to test growth in all content areas. We will also use results from Regents exams as summative assessments to further identify progress and areas grades 11 and 12. The Integrated classes will both meet for 3 days a week for 79 minutes (237 minutes in total). The Integrated classes will be team taught by a licensed ESL teacher (Ericka Median Loesch) and one ELA teacher (Brian Guilford). The class with the students who have IEP's (the 9/10 grade class) will have a special education teacher (Rebecca Meltz) team teaching as 4  of need. The state does not measure AYP for our ELLs because we have an insufficient number of ELLs to create a subgroup. well. These team teaching classes are English classes with intensive ENL strategic support and students will receive core English credit. For the 2018-2019 school year, there will be 2 Integrated classes, one for students in grades 9 and 10 and one for students in grades 11 and 12. The Integrated classes will both meet for 3 days a week for 79 minutes (237 minutes in total). The Integr5  ated classes will be team taught by a licensed ESL teacher (Ericka Median Loesch) and one ELA teacher (Brian Guilford). The class with the students who have IEP's (the 9/10 grade class) will have a special education teacher (Rebecca Meltz) team teaching as well. These team teaching classes are English classes with intensive ENL strategic support and students will receive core Englis6  h credit Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4178 0 0 0 0 4178 Part III: Assessment Analysis After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For the 2017-2018 school year, there will be 2 Integrated classes, one for students in grades 9 and 10 and one for students in grades 11 and 12. The Integrated classes will both meet for 3 days a week for 79 minutes (237 minutes in total). The Integrated ENL classes will be team taught by a licensed ESL teacher (Ericka Medina Loesch) and one ELA teacher (Brian Guilford). The class with the students who have IEP's (the 9/10 grade class) will have a special education teacher (Rebecca Meltz) team teaching as well. These team teaching classes are English classes with intensive ENL strategic support and students will receive core English credit. For the 2018-2019 school year, there will be 2 Integrated classes, one for students in grades 9 and 10 and one for students in grades 11 and 12. The Integrated classes will both meet for 3 days a week for 79 minutes (237 minutes in total). The Integrated classes will be team taught by a licensed ESL teacher (Ericka Median Loesch) and one ELA teacher (Brian Guilford). The class with the students who have IEP's (the 9/10 grade class) will have a special education teacher (Rebecca Meltz) team teaching as well. These team teaching classes are English classes with intensive ENL strategic support and students will receive core English credit. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The teachers are using a common core aligned textbook in all content areas, resources and lesson plans from the Division of English Language Learners and they will be selecting novels to incorporate into the new curriculum that they are creating together. The teachers will give baseline assessments to gather data and determine what skills they need to focus on in order to best assist the students in their class. In order to make content comprehensible to students, the teachers will focus on vocabulary, sentence structure, paragraph building moving towards longer pieces of writing. They will use close reading activities for students to become comfortable readers and so students can learn to emulate, annotate and hold discussions about the texts they examine. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our school offers a free standing ESL program only. Therefore our ELLs do not take classes in their native language. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The teachers will differentiate instruction to address individual student needs. Teachers will prepare materials that will meet the students where they are. For example, students may be placed in groups to examine a text, the questions each group has may differ in order to enable all students to participate. The goal will be that no matter how complex the text, students from all subgroups will have access to it. Similar approaches will be used in all modalities (listening/speaking/reading/writing). 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Teachers give baseline assessments to determine what skills they need to focus on in order to best assist the students in their class, including ELLs and SWDs. In order to make content comprehensible to students, the teachers will focus on vocabulary, 7  and differentiating instruction. The goal will be for teachers to meet students where they are academically and bring them as far as they can possibly go. As well, all teachers have access to the students ELL status/levels and IEPs of the SWDs. Teachers are informed of when IEP meetings take place so they can adjust their lessons according to changes in student needs throughout the school year. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Students are receiving ELL services through content areas of study. The students with IEPs are in ICT classes based on their needs. This kind of scheduling flexibility allows us to meet the needs of our diverse student body. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers from across curricula areas will regularly conference with students and contact parents via phone, letter and/or email early on to address any areas of concern and to help parents assist students at home so parents are aware of what is happening in school. We will implement Project ECHO (Every Child Has Opportunities) where all staff members will participate in choosing a student to mentor for the entire school year. The staff members will meet frequently with their ECHO and provide academic as well as social and emotional support. Our teachers have tutoring on Wednesdays from 12-1 in all content areas. Teachers will also make referrals to guidance counselors who will follow up with students, and parents and then get back to the teachers with feedback. Based on formative and summative assessments, teachers differentiate lessons in class to support student growth. There is also Project GIVE that is is run through the Deans office. In Project GIVE the Deans select seniors which can include Ell's and post Ell's that need support to graduate. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. This school year we have two team taught classes, one with a licensed ENL teacher and an ELA teacher in the other with a third teacher with a special education license for the students with IEPs. There are a few high performing former ELL students that still fall into the two year mandate. However, some will receive AP English courses for the 2018-2019 school year as per their request and the NYCDOE changes in the two year mandate regulation. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. ELLs have access to all school programs. ELLs can participate in Student Government, school run clubs, Wednesday tutoring, Project ECHO, and countless after school programs such as chess club, Global Kids, sports teams, Saturday Academy, field trips, internships, community service, and more. Announcements about all programs are made in classes and on our website. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Teachers use graphic organizers, manipulatives in math, videos, promethean apps, realia, art, photography, primary source materials and more to support ELLs in the classroom. 8  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Ells are provided with glossaries in their ENL class as well as their core subjects. As the teachers get to know the students and their needs, they encourage students to use the glossaries in the class to look up vocabulary that is new to them. Teachers will also encourage students to share how English words are pronounced in their languages and what English words might mean in their language in order to celebrate their cultural differences and highlight similarities. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? As much as possible, we have programmed the 9th and 10th graders into one class section and the 11th and 12th graders in the second class. The teachers will scaffold and differentiate their lessons accordingly. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We do not share resources with Newcomers High School other than the cafeteria, auditorium, library and a SAPIS counselor. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Parents of ELL's will partake in the mandated Parent Orientation (when necessary) and all students will attend the New Student Orientation in August. Our school counselors and ENL Coordinator meet with students to get acquainted with them and assist them as they move through the year. They strive to work with the students to meet their academic and social emotional needs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The language electives offered to ELLs are French and Spanish. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. N/A 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our professional development plan includes sharing best practices and getting to know the needs our our ELL population and discuss how to adjust our practice accordingly. Teachers who attend PD sessions outside of school that are related to ELLs will turnkey what they learn to staff. We will be working with a teacher from the Office of Teacher Development who will work with teachers to meet the needs of all students in our classrooms including ELLs and SWDs.Our teachers attend professional development related to the common core and then turnkey what they learn to each other. We will access the DOE Division of English Language Learners professional development opportunities for our teachers to attend and any other professional development that will assist them in the classroom and that they can turnkey to the rest of the staff. As well, the resources shared by the Department of English Language Learners office from curriculum suggestions to resources and videos are shared with our teachers. Best practices for supporting the needs of ELLs will take place in post observation conferences and through our inter-visitation program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our guidance counselors meet with ELLs to provide counseling and assistance. They hold meetings with the ESL teacher to review students' progress, and they provide advice for our staff as how to deal with a student if he/she is having a difficult time coping with the changes. On Wednesdays, teachers will be meeting in grade teams and departments where they will share 9  concerns they have about how students are transitioning and they will help each other to develop plans to assist them. We have a teacher from the Office of Teacher Development who will be working with us to share best practices and to provide new tools for our teachers to use in the classroom to benefit all of our students including ELLs. Our teachers will share best practices for co-teaching and integrating language and content instruction according to the ELL Policy and Reference Guide for all students and English Language Learners. These PD sessions will occur during our common planning time when our teachers meet every Wednesday from 1:40 - 3:00 pm. All professional development sessions will have agendas and attendance lists. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. According to DOE regulations, our ENL Coordinator will set up meetings with the parents of each ELL student in order to discuss the goals of our program, the language development progress of their children and the needs of our ELLs. We will plan for translators if necessary and the ENL Coordinator, IEP Coordinator, team teachers in the ENL classes and guidance counselors will prepare information on the goals of the program and provide opportunities for questions about specific students. The ENL Coordinator will schedule these meetings according to when parents are available. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL Coordinator, teachers and guidance counselors will keep written records of individual meetings with ELL parents, make regular calls and provide updates on progress through in person meetings, phone calls, letters, and emails. These records will be kept in the cumulative record folders.Parents are invited to PTA meetings (translators will be made available), to college night and awards night, and to attend our freshman orientation. Parents are also offered the opportunity to chaperone our school trips. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We have a variety of activities that all students including ELLs benefit from. We have a large number of arts organizations that we partner with who work with us both in and out of the classroom. The Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History partially funds trips to historic sights around the country, and they fund a Saturday Academy that allows us to offer enrichment classses to our students relating to American History. We have a partnership with the Metropolitan Opera connecting students and their parents to this genre of music. We have a partnership with the 92nd Street Y allowing students to attend readings and meet authors. We have a connection to the Theatre for A New Audience to bring Shakespeare to life for our students. We will be continuing our partnership with the Museum of Modern Art so that our juniors can visit the museum and work with their teaching artist in our Art and English classrooms. Each of these programs provides opportunities for parents of ELLs to join us as chaperones. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. William Bassell 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Academy of American Studies 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 30Q575 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? William C. Bassell 18. For schools with dual language programs: 0  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 1/1/01 Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Nina Cohen 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 1/1/01 Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? N/A 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 1/1/01 Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Ericka Medina Loesch 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, 1/1/01, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: TBD School DBN: 1/1/01 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Brian Guilford Title Principal Rebecca Meltz Assistant Principal NA NA Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Roberta Wilson Parent Elaine Lindsey Teacher/Subject Area NA 1/1/01 1/1/01 Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member 1/1/01 Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 30Q575 School Name: Academy of American Studies Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Julia Tzortzatos ENL Coordinator and LAC Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. A report from ATS (RNMR) is run to access the different languages spoken by our ELL's in addition to the Home Language Survey and Student Emergency Contact Cards. We make sure that our ELL parents receive any pertinent information in their native language. When parents visit our building , translation is provided by a staff member who speaks the same language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARMENIAN ARABIC BALANTE BENGALI BURMESE CHINESE ANY CANTONESE FRENCH GUJARATI GREEK HINDI ITALIAN KOREAN MACEDONIAN MANDARIN NEPALI ENGLISH PILIPINO PUNJABI POLISH PORTUGUESE ROMANIAN RUSSIAN SENUFO 3 1 21 1 34 2 29 0 1 1 9 1 2 4 1 0 2 687 2 3 12 5 1 2 3 0.29 0.1 2.04 0.1 3.3 0.19 2.82 0 0.1 0.1 0.87 0.1 0.19 0.39 0.1 0 0.19 66.76 0.19 0.29 1.17 0.49 0.1 0.19 0.29 4 1 25 1 36 2 21 1 1 1 9 2 2 4 1 6 1 678 2 4 13 5 1 3 3 0.39 0.1 2.43 0.1 3.5 0.19 2.04 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.87 0.19 0.19 0.39 0.1 0.58 0.1 65.89 0.19 0.39 1.26 0.49 0.1 0.29 0.29 5  SPANISH TAMIL THAI TIBETAN URDU UKRAINIAN NA NA NA 187 18.17 186 18.08 1 2 6 5 1 NA NA NA 0.1 0.19 0.58 0.49 0.1 NA NA NA 1 2 6 6 1 NA NA NA 0.1 0.19 0.58 0.58 0.1 NA NA NA 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Calendars, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information, testing dates, and academic information. This information is distributed to families throughout the year when necessary. NA NA NA All times of the school year. Use of the NYCDOE translation services. NA NA NA NA NA NA 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 6  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Every September we have a Meet The Teacher Night in order for parents to get to know the teacher who will be working with their child throughout the school year and so they can glean information on the curriculum goals for each class. Each month we hold PTA meetings and SLT meetings covering guidance concerns, college information, health resources and a variety of academic issues. Our attendance teacher meets weekly with our AP Guidance and our Guidance Counselors and is regularly in contact with parents by phone, meeting with them in school and by visiting homes when necessary. Guidance Counselors also participate in Meet the Teacher Night so they can get to know the parents of the students they work with. In addition, they often run informational sessions at PTA meetings and they meet with parents at Parent Teacher Conferences. They have conversations with parents via phone, email or in school meetings when necessary. Translators are available. Title III Translation funds are used to hire translators for Open School. NA NA NA Ongoing throughout the school year. Use of the NYCDOE translation services. NA NA NA NA NA NA 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Staff that are bilingual can relay information on a robo-call, or translate emails sent out via Pupil Path. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 7  Staff will receive and review at the beginning of the school year Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All key documents will be available in multiple languages. The DOE translation service will be used. Records will be kept of which parents need language translation provided for by the DOE. The parents bill of rights will be provided during PTA meetings, parent/teacher conferences and meetings the ENL teacher sets up with parents throughout the year. Interpretation notice signs will be posted in both the north and south buildings in multiple languages. The safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services will have it. Funds specifically designated for language translation will be utilized to provide translation of memoranda, documents, and oral translation where appropriate. The school will work with the unit to ensure all requirements are met and all needs are filled. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The ENL Coordinator will create a feedback form that we will make available at our PTA meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences and on our school website. 8 
