 24Q610 School Name: AVIATION CAREER & TECHNICAL EDUCATION HIGH SCHOOL Principal: STEVEN JACKSON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: AVIATION CTE HIGH SCHOOL 24Q610 342400011610 9, 10, 11, 12, SE School Number (DBN): 45-30 36 TH STREET, LONG ISLAND CITY, NY 11101 718-361-2032 718-784-8654 Phone Number: Fax: NOEMI RODRIGUEZ 24q610@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Email Address: STEVEN R. JACKSON JOSE VAZ CHEVIONWEAKS-LOPEZ & ALEJANDROTURCIOS Parents’ Association President: STEVEN R. JACKSON SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: NARCISA OTALAVO HEILYGRISALES JANUELARAUJO TBD District Information Geographical District: 24 ELAINE LINDSEY Superintendent: 30-48 LINDEN PLACE, FLUSHING, NY 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: elindse@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 281-3517 Phone Number: (718) 281-7690 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   QUEENS DISTRICT 24 LAWRENCE PENDERGAST FSC: Executive Director: 28-11 QUEENS PLAZA NORTH, LONG ISLAND CITY, NY 11101 Executive Director’s Office Address: LPender@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 225-2020 Phone Number: (718) 828-5488 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name STEVEN R. JACKSON JOSE VAZ CHEVIONWEAKS-LOPEZ NARCISA OTAVALO HEILYGRISALES JANUELARAUJO ROGELIOTURCIOS UDESHPERSAD Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President Member/ TEACHER   Name JOSE FELIX MONTENEGRO DIANA SANTANDER JANINE AIELLO MICHAEL KOUMOULLOS Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ TEACHER Member/ ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Aviation High School is to provide our students with a high quality rigorous academic and technical program that will prepare them to meet the educational challenges of the 21st century and a career in aerospace. In order to ensure the success of our students, Aviation High School's team of staff, parents, students and industry partners will develop in them a belief that they cannot only meet, but exceed, the required standards of academic excellence in Regents and Federal Aviation Administration curricula.   In this nurturing educational environment, students will be able to demonstrate their ability to do analytical and critical thinking as well as effectively communicate with others. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Aviation High School is not just a school, it is a career! It is the largest public school in the United States that provides New York City youth with a high quality academic education coupled with a rigorous FAA approved Aviation Maintenance Technology program. Aviation High School occupies a city block and has seven instructional floors, complete with a full complement of various shops and a hangar which houses nineteen aircraft. Aviation High School’s Annex is located at JFK International Airport for 5 th year senior Powerplant Honors students. All students at the Annex have internships at JFK International Airport in addition to their regular classes. Our quality educational program will prepare students for admission to college as well as careers in the aerospace industry. Our unique dual-purpose program: Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) – approved Aviation Maintenance Technology plus College Preparatory Program provides students with both a high quality, rigorous academic and technical education. Students qualify for a Regents diploma while they earn their Airframe and/or Powerplant certification which would cost a great deal of money elsewhere. They gain the ability to use technology, think critically as well as to work and to communicate effectively with others. This provides students with entry level skills needed for high paying careers in the ever-changing aerospace industry as well as allows them to continue their education, especially in the area of aerospace engineering. Those students who apply to aerospace technical college programs may receive up to two years of advanced college standing, worth thousands of dollars in tuition fees. Seniors are eligible for various airline internship programs to further enhance their skills during their last year at Aviation High School. Aviation’s FAA program has proven to be quite successful. Our students consistently achieve above the average FAA norm for the nation. Our academic program has been equally successful, surpassing the state standard benchmarks in English, Mathematics, Social Studies and Science. Efforts and attention continue to be directed to maintaining a challenging academic and technical curriculum. We work very closely with ou aviation industry partners to ensure that our program is aligned to industry needs and expectations. Our Advisory Board of aviation industry personnel helps to inform our decision making process and to monitor the quality of our aviation maintenance program and job placement opportunities. The aerospace industry has a strong affiliation with our school; sharing their expertise and providing industry experiences to our students to enhance the quality of our program. We remain committed to providing our students with the quality aerospace education they so earnestly deserve. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Aviation High School has been adjusting to the increase in its Students with Disabilities (SWD) population. We have had to hire more ICT teachers and to provide more specific professional development to improve instruction in the ICT and Self-Contained classrooms. We are researching how we can help our SWD students graduate on time with their cohort. The percentage of incoming freshmen students with IEPs in the 2018-2019 school year is 16.8%, with the majority of these students being ICT students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Aviation High School has made the most progress in Supportive Environment during the 2018-2019 school year improving from 2.85 in the 2016-2017 school year to 3.15 in the 2017-2018 school year. Our school community has worked very hard to ensure that all students are known well by their teachers and that all students are provided with structures and support to ensure their success in academic and aviation maintenance classes. 0  We are focused on developing the element of Collaborative Teachers in the 2018-2019 school year. School leadership is working on incorporating greater teacher input and voice into the decision making and instructional focus of the school through increased teacher led committee development, an instructional cabinet, peer intervisitation strategies and common professional period work. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 24Q610 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 2084 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 105 90 11 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 8 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 63.0% % Attendance Rate 59.7% % Reduced Lunch 3.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 45.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.09 1% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 98% 97% 94.3% 50.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YSH YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES No N/A 140 120 81 97.3% 2.4% 13.3% 4.4% 36.6% 4.2% 14 3% 7.8 N/A N/A 99% 98% 94.0% 67% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the 2018-2019 school year the priority need in this area, and for the school's mission, is to increase the number of students earning Federal Aviation Administration license to meet the hiring needs of the aviation industry. The strengths of our program relative to the element above is that 330 students qualified to earn their aviation maintenance airframe or powerplant license at the end of the 2017-2018 school year as compared to 290 students who qualified in the previous year. Aviation High School is a secondary education program that is training students to earn their license at a level with is taught at the college level throughout the country. Additionally, we have implemented a new curriculum sequence as of the 2016-2017 school year and monitoring the progress of our tenth grade aviation maintenance students is necessary to ensure that our General Aviation maintenance courses are preparing students for their Airframe and Powerplant licensing courses. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will increase the number of students who are on track to earn their Federal Aviation Administration Airframe or Powerplant license at the end of the tenth grade by 2% by June 2019. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Access to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) remediation course and testing offerings with increased opportunities in the spring of 2019. English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities will be provided with additional guidance and support to help them better understand and meet FAA standards, expectations. and make up course work. Inform students and parents of all aspects of the FAA licensing requirements and conduct workshops to ensure that FAA regulations are understood by the parents and students. All students and parents Students will be provided with Qualifying Exam review opportunities throughout the spring of 2019 All senior FAA students Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students who are struggling or fail a FAA licensing area in any ninth or tenth grade FAA course. ELL and SWD Students Assistant Principals, Programming Office, Guidance Department and Teachers Course and make up testing dates throughout the fall and spring terms. Fall 2018, Winter 2018/2019 and Spring 2019 Fall 2018, Winter 2018/2019 and Spring 2019 Assistant Principals, Guidance Department and Teachers Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, Parent Coordinator and Teachers Spring 2019 Assistant Principals, Aviation Maintenance Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. All families will be invited to parent workshops in the Fall and Spring semesters to review the make up, expectations, remediation rules and options and licensing opportunities of the FAA program throughout the entire school year. The assistant principals of Aviation Maintenance, the Guidance Department, Parent Coordinator and teachers will be responsible for implementation and oversight. Additionally, parents will be provided with progress updates to ensure that they aware of their child's FAA license attainment progress, as well as access to the JumpRope FAA transcript system to allow parents to monitor their child's progress from home. 4  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  VTEA funding, Work-Based Learning funding and support from the CTE office.  Human Resources: assistant principals, guidance counselors, parent coordinator and teachers.  Per Session for Saturday Academy remediation courses and make up testing dates.  Tax Levy and Title I funding to provide support to help students maintain their license status.  Input and evaluation from industry partners. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.   Student FAA course and final exam scholarship will be reviewed every rotation 21 days (end of FAA course length) each term to determine student remediation needs. FAA transcripts will be reviewed in Fall and Spring to ensure that all students are aware of their FAA status and the timeline that they have to make up their missing FAA requirements.  Based on mid-point benchmark analysis and looking at FAA final exam grades from the 2017-2018 school year compared to the 2018-2019 school year we are at a passing rate increase of 1% with the additional action items planned for the remainder of the school year, we believe our students will meet the 2% increase goal. The CEP reflects our midyear analysis. o Midyear data indicates a 1% increase in the passing percentage as compared to the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  The assistant principals will review scholarship data each term to ensure that students are on target to meet FAA requirements using the STARS and JumpRope system to track student progress.  Teachers will review FAA transcripts each rotation with students to ensure that all records are up-to-date and  students are aware of remediation time lines. For our mid-point benchmark review we looked at the FAA first term final exam grades for all sophomore students from the 2017-2018 school year compared to the first term FAA grades for all sophomores in the current school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the 2017-2018 New York City School Quality Guide and School Survey, Aviation High School's strengths in this element as evidenced in the survey result that approximately 79% of responders feel that they are learning in a supportive environment. We have an extensive network of counselors, teachers, support staff and administrators who check in with students to ensure that their needs are being addressed and that negative behaviors are properly addressed. For the 2018-2019 school year the priority need in this area and for the school to improve outreach and behavioral interventions for all IEP students. IEP students are supported by a team of SWD teachers, paraprofessionals, an administrator, secretary and a dedicated guidance counselor to help them stay on track to graduate and transition successfully into adulthood. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Incoming students with an IEP will transition smoothly to Aviation High School through participation in a transitional outreach program as evidenced anecdotally by fewer instances of intervention, by June 2019. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development sessions will be conducted to provide staff with interventions and strategies to deescalate incidents and help students transition to each grade level. Teachers Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Teachers Development of a summer bridge program for incoming students who scored lower on state assessments to help students (including ELL and SWD students) transition from middle school to high school. Student and Parents Summer 2018 Assistant Principals and Teachers School counseling staff will monitor and oversee reports of student behavior and provide appropriate interventions and parental outreach, especially for under-credited and out of cohort students. Student and Parents The Committee for Special Education (CSE) team will review student progress, monitor student behavioral reports and provide appropriate interventions (with parental outreach). Students and Parents Ongoing through 2018-2019 school year Ongoing through 2018-2019 school year School Counselors and Teachers Teachers, Administrators, Support Staff and School Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. As stated above, families of struggling students will be invited to participate in a summer bridge program to ensure that students are provided with strategies for success at Aviation High School. Parents and guardians will be provided with progress updates on how well their child is transitioning into high school or each coming grade level. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resources: Principal, Assistant Principals, School Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Teachers and Parents.  Grant funding to supplement summer school funding to provide summer bridge program courses.  Per session to help students with transitional programs, AIS supports and parental outreach. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 7  X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers and School Counselors will monitor student progress in the summer bridge program and follow student progress in the freshmen year, checking in with student's after the third marking period (February).  During the mid-point benchmark progress review our school has monitored and provided appropriate interventions and guidance to mitigate student behavioral issues.  Midyear analysis of anecdotal guidance notes indicate a reduction in Skedula and OORS 2017-2018 to 2018-2019 school year reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Successful student completion of the summer bridge program.   Review of OORS data each month.  During the mid-year benchmark progress monitoring meeting we reviewed our action items and completed professional learning objectives and plans. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Aviation High School consistently reports a higher than average passing rate on the Global History and Geography Regents exam. Students show strength on multiple choice questions and short answer completion.  The recent changes to the Global History and Geography curriculum has required the social studies department to revise unit and lesson planning, as well as classroom instructional strategies.  The need for all students (especially SWD and ELL students) to improve their reading and writing abilities and skills. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers of tenth grade Global History and Geography will work collaboratively in inquiry teams to align instruction to the new New York State Social Studies Framework, focusing on the achievement of SWD and ELL students, as evidenced by a 3% increase of student passing the Global History and Geography Regents by June 2019. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will receive professional development on the new Global History and Geography exam Teachers Uniform assessments and benchmark assessments will be aligned to the new exam framework to monitor student growth and progress. The Global History and Geography tenth grade team will create modified lesson tasks to incorporate more opportunities for students to develop the skills required for the new Global History and Geography Regents. Teachers and Students Each marking period students who are in danger of failing or failing the marking period will be provided with targeted intervention and tutoring. Students Assistant Principal and Teachers Assistant Principal and Teachers Assistant Principal and Teachers Ongoing Throughout 2018-2019 School Year Ongoing Throughout 2018-2019 School Year October, 2018, November 2018, January 2019, March 2019 and May 2019 All Global History and Geography students will be provided with a mock Regents exam that mirrors the new Regents format. Students May 2019 Assistant Principal and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents will be provided with updates and information on the new Global History and Geography Regents expectations and format of the new exam during a Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 Parents' Association meeting.  The assistant principal of humanities and the Global History team will provide students and parents with updates and resources to help all students earn passing grade on the June 2019 Global History and Geography Regents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0   The school will create time for staff to meet and review their Global History and Geography Regents data.  Department Assistant Principals and Programming Committee will provide protocols and data for looking at student work.  Per session will be made available for additional time for action plan implementation (depending on budget and student need).  Professional Development resources will be needed to conduct targeted professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February, we will review the third marking period grades to monitor student progress in all Global History and Geography courses.  Each month the assistant principal will conduct department meetings to ensure that the action plan and monitoring is meeting the goal.  By June 2019 all Global History and Geography teachers will review the Regents data to identify emerging patterns and trends to address for future lesson planning.  Midyear analysis of student progress indicates that there has been a decrease of 6% of SWD students passing tenth grade Global History after the third marking period. The total number of passing students increased, but the total population has increased in the 2018-2019 school year. The action plan has been updated after February SLT review and planning. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Classroom observations   During the mid-year benchmark progress review we reviewed the third marking period grades of all Student achievement sophomore students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  According to the 2017-2018 Learning Environment Surveys and Principal Performance Observation reports, the area of teacher-to-teacher collaboration is an area of focus.  Based on ongoing discussions with the School Leadership Team, the cabinet, the UFT, Parents' Association and teachers at large, effective communication and collaboration is the key to success as evidenced in 89% of survey responders responding positively to questions pertaining to collaboration.  More regularly scheduled administrative meetings are needed based on review of previous school year meeting schedules and effectiveness.  Teacher committees can be more readily used to help school leadership receive teacher feedback and provide staff with more avenues for input into school-wide practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Administration will incorporate the UFT Professional Development Committee into all Professional Development, collaborating fully with the staff in professional development decision-making by December 2018, as evidenced by professional development agendas designed in concert with the professional development committee. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Principal and Assistant Principals will increase communication with the staff on school assemblies, after school activities, Saturday events and community events. All staff All staff will utilize all results of the improved school-wide communication to ensure that all students and parents are keep up-to-date on all school expectations, updates and performance goals. All staff The Principal, Assistant Principals and teachers will incorporate leadership and collaborative opportunities for teachers to participate in school-wide committees, regular intervisitation cycles and monthly instructional cabinet meetngs. All staff Guidance Staff will maintain open communication with staff and parents regarding student socio-emotional wellness. Parents will see increased communication from the school regarding school operations, events and other updates. All staff Principal, Assistant Principals and Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors and Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals and Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals and Teachers Fall 2018, Winter 2018/2019 and Spring 2019 Fall 2018, Winter 2018/2019 and Spring 2019 Fall 2018, Winter 2018/2019 and Spring 2019 Fall 2018, Winter 2018/2019 and Spring 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents will be provided with updated schedules and times for when Common Planning Half-Days take place and how the inquiry work informs instruction.  The Parents' Association will be incorporated into the school leadership planning and CEP implementation as outlined in this CEP through their monthly meetings with the principal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3   Teachers will be provided with time to work in their teams during their professional periods.  School leadership will meet weekly to discuss the action plan above and school-wide professional development goals.  Pertinent school staff will be provided with meeting specific information and schedules.  Pertinent school staff will structure their schedules around regularly meetings throughout the school year as outlined above. Instructional resources will be provided as a result of meeting decisions and staff needs and requests. School leadership, department staff and support staff will be utilized to address the action plan above.   Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February, we will have two sets of agendas and/ or minutes that will reflect the increase in weekly cabinet  and monthly Professional Development committee meeting. Staff Surveys will be distributed periodically to increase success of activities implemented and modified as necessary.  A school wide survey will be created by school administration distributed during the January professional development conference to assess progress towards this goal.  During the mid-year benchmark progress review we have determined that this goal has already been met. We included more teachers in the planning of our professional development plan and we have increased the number of school-based workshops and the number of staff attending Professional Learning Opportunities.  Midyear analysis of professional development planning and opportunities indicates greater teacher input and more staff choice of professional development topics and sessions. This goal is on target to be achieved. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff surveys   During the mid-year benchmark progress monitoring we reviewed our professional development plans and completed sessions led by teachers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Aviation High School is a part of a larger network of maintenance technician schools and industry partners. Aviation High School graduates make up over 50% of the technicians in the tristate area.  Aviation High School students need access to aviation industry internships as stated by industry partners and the school's Advisory Board.  Parents and students are informed about school requirements as shown in the calendar of Parents' Association meeting topics, but great school-parent connections are required regarding the Federal Aviation Administration course requirements.  This goal addresses the priority need of providing our students and parents with access to the industry, especially at a time where there is a huge demand for technicians. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Administration will incorporate our Advisory Board members into an increased number of school-based events, such as Parents' Association meetings and Orientation, by June 2019, as evidenced by an increased number of Advisory Board member interactions with students, parents and staff. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Meet with current internship partners such as Jet Blue, Panasonic Aviation, Mach II Aviation during the Fall of 2018 to schedule opportunities for industry staff to meet with parents and students Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Fall 2018 Principal and Assistant Principals of Aviation Maintenance Membership partners such as Jet Blue, Panasonic Aviation and Port Authority of NY and NJ Contact airlines and aviation companies quarterly to seek out partnerships with our school and to develop increased partnerships with the aviation industry Aviation companies and airlines Create a team of industry technicians to conduct aviation maintenance class walkthroughs to provide feedback on industry standards and expectations to our staff. Industry Partners and Teachers School leadership and Alumni Association will contact Aviation companies and airlines and set-up meetings to discuss new partnerships. We will inform parents of internships and mentoring opportunities through the Parent’s Association, automated calls and emails in order to increase the amount of student participating in the internships and mentoring. Alumni Association, Assistant Principals and industry partners Fall 2018, Winter 2018/2019, Spring 2019 Principal and Assistant Principals of Aviation Maintenance Ongoing Throughout the 2018-2019 School Year Principal and Assistant Principals and Teachers of Aviation Maintenance Winter 2018/2019, Spring 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals and Alumni Association 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Aviation High School's Advisory Board comprised of partners from the aviation industry (including Detla Airlines, JetBlue Airways, Panasonic, KLM, and Virgin Atlantic) and Vaughn College. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6   Alumni funding  Grants from airline partners  The school website will be utilized to post alumni and aviation industry updates and information  Per session will be made available for additional time for action plan implementation (depending on budget and student need). School staff will be provided to help bridge school to airline industry partnerships (as needed). Staff schedules may be adjusted to provide for time to meet with airline partners (budget permitting).   Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, we will have an increase of 2% in the amount of interactions that industry partners have  within the school as evidenced by partner participation in key school events. School leadership will evaluate the progress of this goal in January 2019 and in May 2019 to ensure that all students are provided with the airline industry opportunities available to them.  Midyear analysis of industry partner participation indicates that more events incorporated industry partner input and participation. This goal is on target to be achieved. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student and industry surveys   During the mid-point benchmark monitoring meeting we reviewed the data from the new interactions. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● Students who enroll in High School as level 1 or level 2 on ELA State exams. ● Students who fall behind in credits each grade level. ● Students who need to retake the ELA Regents exam due to failing grade or non-college ready grade. ● Teacher Recommendation Mathematics ● Students who enroll in High School as level 1 or level 2 on Math State exams. ● Students who fall behind in credits each grade level. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Students with ELA Scores of 1 and 2 are scheduled for a freshman skills English class. ● Teachers utilize a variety of data to differentiate instruction in a balanced literacy environment. ● Extended day class (Spring term) for credit recovery funded through LaGuardia Community College. ● Teachers review ongoing data assessments to differentiate instructional practices based on student need. ● Discrete Math for upper term (Junior & Senior) students who struggled getting through Integrated Algebra. ● Extended Day class (Spring term) for credit recovery When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Regents Prep tutoring is available in the Fall and Spring term before or after-school. ● Extended day services for credit recovery during our Saturday Academy. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● All students are placed in 10 th , 11 th and 12 th year English classes based on teacher/guidance recommendations. ● Tutoring services are available throughout the year through professional period assignments during their lunch periods in both one-on-one and group settings. ● Two-year Integrated Algebra in reduced register classes for incoming Freshmen students with weak skills in mathematics, such as those scoring at Level 1 or Level 2. ● Tutoring services offered throughout the year as follows:  C-6 professional assignment.  Intensive Regents preparation in 8  Science ● Students who need to retake the Algebra or Geometry Regents exam due to failing grade or non-college ready grade. ● Teacher Recommendation ● Students who fall behind in credits each grade level. ● Students who need to retake the Earth Science, Living Environment, Chemistry or Physics Regents exam due to failing grade. ● Teacher Recommendation January for students not meeting the more rigorous CUNY college readiness requirements. ● Summer School courses for credit recovery. ● Tutoring services offered throughout the year as follows:  C-6 professional assignment  One-on-one tutoring  Regents and preparation  Peer tutoring ● Summer School funded through LaGuardia Community College. ● A two-year Algebra II course for upper term students with weak Algebra skills. ●Infuse study skills into all math classes ●Provide Differentiated instruction and exams to implement all mandated accommodations ● Identification of students who have passed a science class, but who have failed the corresponding Regents. ● Peer tutoring and tutoring with a content specialist are available. ● Infuse study skills into all science classes. ● Careful monitoring of Special education students and ELL students in science classes and regularly differentiating instruction to meet the needs of these populations. ● Missing lab information to be provided to all science class teachers ● Two-year Integrated Algebra in reduced register classes for sophomore students with weak skills in mathematics. ● Math AP to visit classes at the beginning of the school year and periodically thereafter. ● Science AP visitation to science classes at the beginning of the school year and as needed throughout the school year. ● Science AP and Principal will conference with students in jeopardy of failing lab or their science class. ● Small group tutoring and one-on-one tutoring as needed. ● Notify and work with Guidance Department on helping students in need. Program students for class placement with input from teachers and data provided by the program office. 9  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Tutoring services offered throughout the year as follows:  C-6 professional assignment  One-on-one tutoring  Regents preparation ● Summer School courses for credit recovery. Ongoing, as needed ● Extended Day PM and Saturday Academy classes for credit recovery and tutoring. ● Students who fall behind in credits each grade level. ● Students who need to retake the Global History or United States History Regents exam due to failing grade. ● Teacher Recommendation ● Students who fall behind in credits each grade level. ● AIS Grade Advisor assigned to at-risk students ● Students who need to retake Regents exam due to failing grades. ● Teacher Recommendation ● Guidance Referrals. ● Parental Requests. ● Review of student historical records. ● Assessments of Social-Emotional Needs. ● Review of IEP. ● SWD Team Recommendations. ● Planning interviews and alternative school placement. ● Guidance lesson on good study practices and time management. ● Consult teachers on students’ progress and performance. ● Consult with SIT team members before an IEP meeting for their recommendations. ● Provide 1:1 clinician counseling with at-risk students (General Ed and Special Ed). ● Crisis intervention services ● Parent workshops on. Organization and time management. ● AP tutoring will be offered to all Advanced Placement students with an emphasis on students struggling to meet the rigorous standards of the College Board approved curriculum. ● Conflict resolution. ● Attendance improvement and outreach. ● SAT (School Assessment Team) case manager for the completion of EPCs. ● 1:1 Meeting with students for Psycho-Educational Evaluations and Vocational Assessments. ● 1:1 Conference with parents for social updates and parental concerns. ● Crisis intervention services ● 1:1 meeting with students and parents. ● Observe students’ performance and behavior in classes. ● Meet with teachers, Guidance Counselors, 0  ● Parent workshop on teen suicide and warning signs. mandated providers, and Special Education Assistant Principal for input and feedback. ● P arent workshop on communicating with teenagers and discussing topics such as sex, the internet and its proper use and safety. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 21 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide tutoring and supplies as needed to all students in temporary housing. These resources include school supplies, aviation maintenance course supplies, book bags, etc. The resources also include additional support services provided by school counselors and support staff to ensure that all students in temporary housing progress successful towards on-time graduation. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Aviation High School hires New York State certified educators throughout all departments. We provide professional development and training throughout the school year to staff in one-on-one, small group and full group professional development sessions. All teachers are highly qualified and the school leadership will conduct regular observations to ensure that all staff are highly qualified or are provided with additional help and resources to become highly qualified for all subjects and courses. Aviation High School will work with the Field Support Center, industry partners and local colleges and universities to recruit highly qualified teachers for all needs areas. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All department supervisors provide ongoing professional development on the Common Core State Standards. Teachers are trained in strategies and techniques to help them implement Common Core State Standards into all of their lessons. Teachers are also provided with centrally developed and administered professional development. The school will provide monthly professional development to meet all state and Department of Education requirements and to ensure that all staff receive the differentiation they need to develop their pedagogy to ensure that all students and subgroups achieve success in our program. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 4  Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Department Administrators and Teachers review assessment results and develop professional development items that will be focus of monthly department meetings and Chancellor’s Conference Day sessions throughout the school year. Additionally, Teachers will use data from multiple assessments to identify student needs and work with Assistant Principals to program students for appropriate classes. Teacher teams will work on developing instructional strategies that will be developed and implemented in these classes in order to improve student outcomes. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal 819,214 0 12,366 X 0 X 5 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e NA 5a, 5e  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 13,809,291 0 X NA 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 6   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Aviation Career and Technical Education High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Aviation Career and Technical Education High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality Aviation Career and Technical Education High Schools Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by Aviation Career and Technical Education High School. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, tAviation Career and Technical Education High School will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 9  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Aviation Career and Technical Education High School will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Aviation Career and Technical Education High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and 0  students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 1  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 2  ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 3  ● always try my best to learn. 4 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Our Title III program will provide ELLs with supplemental instruction through our before school and Saturday Academy programs. This instructional program will service our ELL population depending on student areas of need as indicated by state standardized tests, marking period report cards, and long term ELL students as identified by the state. The focus of our ELL supplemental program will be to provide supplemental instruction in small groups and individual differentiated instruction to support the Common Core Learning Standards through the development of critical reading, writing, thinking, speaking and listening skills. Based on the first marking period report card grades of the 2018-2019 school year, the previous school year’s NYSELAT scores and teacher recommendations, we will hold instructional support once a week in our before school program in the following two areas: Earth Science and Aviation Maintenance Technology. We will also hold Saturday Academy workshops for our long term ELL students. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: We have 61 ELLs in grades 9 through 12; 38 students are identified as Long Term. Schedule and duration: : For the before school program—2018-2019—there are two ENL teachers and two teachers in the content areas: Aviation Maintenance Technology and Earth Science. We will run weekly instructional program session for 45 minutes for 35 weeks running from November to June excluding holidays and vacations. The before school program is content-driven supplementary instruction to ensure each students’ success in the specified course. For the Saturday ELL Support Workshops for our Long Term ELL students will commence in March 2019 and run through May for a total of ten sessions. The purpose of this class is to help students identify their individual English language strengths and weaknesses, and to build an individualized program to develop and expand their acquisition and mastery of language. The Saturday Support Workshops are designed to help Long Term ELL students master the NYSESLAT examination. The target audience for these workshops will be ninth and tenth grade Long Term ELL students. The workshops will be limited to no more than 14 students. After the first marking, October 26, the program office will generate a list of all ELL students who received a 70 or lower in Earth Science and Aviation Maintenance classes. Based on these reports, letters will be sent home to each students’ home language informing them that have been selected to receive supplementary instruction to ensure their success in the course. After each marking period, we will review data to monitor students’ progress and determine whether or not the student will be required to attend this supplementary class, and if any additional ELL student needs the class. Program Activity Teacher Period Time Days 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Room Earth Science In Depth Ms. Iacovou Mr. Taha 0 7:15-8:00 F 535 Aviation Maintenance Ms. Haloulos Mr. Persad 0 7:15-8:00 TH 308 Long Term ELL Ms. Ritter 0 7:30-11:30 S 335 Licenses: Ms. Iacovou, State Certification in TESOL, English Day HS Ms. Musici, State Certification in TESOL Ms. Haloulos, English Day HS with ESL extension Ms. Ritter, English Day HS with ESL extension Mr. Taha, State Certification in Earth Science Mr. Persad, Teacher of Aviation Maintenance & State Certification in Occupational Studies Language of Instruction: English with the support of bilingual materials such as glossaries and dictionaries. The teachers will use researched based strategies to focus on critical reading, writing, speaking and listening skills necessary for success on the class assessments including project based learning, State Examinations including the NYSESLAT exam and on enhancing literacy through supplemental instruction. Content area supplemental instruction will focus content specific critical learning skills in aviation technology. Teachers will provide differentiated student centered learning and implement such strategies as cooperative learning, CALLA approach, SIOP approach as well as a project based, hands on approach. Types of Materials: We will purchase materials and general supplies for the Title III supplementary programs including: chart paper, graph paper, markers, pens, notebooks, and test prep review books to be used exclusively by the students enrolled in these classes. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered 7  Part C: Professional Development · name of provider Begin description here: Rationale: Professional Development focuses on providing ENL and Content Areas teachers with differentiated instructional strategies for teaching the English Language Learner. Its primary function is twofold: to provide Title III ENL and ENL Content Areas teacher with English language learners research based pedagogical strategies to best meet the needs of our ELLs, to prepare ELLs to meet Common Core Learning Standards, Regents and FAA Standards to be successful on all State Assessments examinations through differentiated instruction. The FAA exams for certification for Airframe and Power Plant licenses are administered in English. Our ELL students must achieve a high level of critical English skills to successfully complete the requirements. Attendance will be taken before each meeting to record those present, and will be collected and stored by the ENL chairperson, along with the agenda. The purpose of these instructional meetings is to assist our teachers to ensure that our ELL students meet and exceed our mission statement by providing them with multi-disciplinary language strategies. Title III Providers to receive training: There are four ENL Teachers and two Content Area teachers who will receive the training. (See Part B) Schedule and Training: There will be three professional development sessions, 46 minutes in duration of each: November, February and April. Training will be done in-house. However, the AP English/ENL notifies by e-mail all Departmental APs and those on the Title III teacher team, of all Professional Development available from outside resources such as DELLSS. Topics to be covered: 1. November: Instructional strategies for Vocabulary Instruction 2. February: Instructional strategies for Making Meaning From Text—Modeling Reading Comprehension 3. April: Instructional strategies needed to meet the needs of ELLs in testing proficient on the NYSESLAT and FAA Content Area classes. (Language Development CALPS) Share best practices. Name of Providers: Peter Sirena, Coordinator English/ENL Phryne Iacovou, ESL Teacher and ENL Coordinator—State Certification in TESOL Names of Title III Teachers—See Part B. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Rationale: The partnership with parents/guardians is imperative for the success of all children. At the center of parental involvement at Aviation High School is the Parents Association and our Parent Coordinator. This is a group of parents of present Aviation High School students who support and sponsor workshops and activities used to keep parents informed and involved. Schedule and Duration: We will hold two parent workshops for all ELL parents. One in the fall semester and another in the early Spring. Each workshop will be two hours from 9-11 AM. Parents will be notified through letters mailed to their address, both in English and in their home language, and through our website: www.aviationhs.net. The invitations are translated into the home language with the assistance of the Office of Translation and Interpretation Unit. The first meeting will focus on the issues ELL students have in meeting standards, and steps parents can take to ensure their child succeeds both academically and socially. The second meeting will focus on steps parents can take to ensure their child is preparing for college and career readiness. Since the majority of parents are Spanish speaking, we will have a Spanish speaking staff member to provide a translation of what is being discussed. Parents attending these workshops will sign an attendance sheet which will be collected and file by the ENL chairperson. Meeting will be conducted by: · · · · · The Coordinator of English/ENL collaborates with the AP Guidance, Parent Coordinator, ENL Coordinator and Office of Translation and Interpretation to ensure that Title III letters to parents are distributed in the home languages. They are backpacked home and are posted on the Aviation website. Signed copies will be collected by ENL teachers and given to ENL chairperson who keep them on file along with the agenda of each meeting. Phryne Iacovou, ENL Coordinator (State Certification in TESOL, English Day HS) Justin Foley, Assistant Principal Humanities Peter Sirena,&nbsp;Coordinator English/ENL Wendy Gutierrez, Guidance Counselor Noemi Rodriguez, Parent Coordinator&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 24 School Name Aviation High School Borough Queens School Number 610 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Steven R. Jackson Coach Peter Sirena, ELA Coordinator ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elizabeth Ritter Teacher/Subject Area Meghan Slater Teacher/Subject Area Magdalena Guillen Related-Service Provider Monica Ortiz, AP ISS Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Justin Foley, Humanities Coach Phryne Iacovou, ENL/BESIS Coor School Counselor Michael Koumoullos, APG Parent Parent Coordinator Noemi Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Patrick Browne, APO C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 5 5 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 2093 1 Total number of ELLs 64 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.06%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 0 K 0 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 .0 0.0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use teacher-created formative and curriculum-embedded assessments to guide instructional planning. The data collected from these assessments are used to identify specific areas of need and to track individual students' growth. The data also show that seventy-five percent of our ENL students are also students with disabilities (SWD) so our instructional planning for our ELL students closely mirrors that of the Special Education department. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have dedicated teams made up of teachers, administrators, and non-pedagogical support staff to support our ENL teachers. Our ELL Team collects data and identifies areas of concern, and our Professional Development Team takes those data collected by teachers and identified areas of concern and create strategic plans to offer professional learning opportunities for 2  our teachers with ENL students. Individual teachers attend Professional Learning Opportunities offered by our Borough Field Support Center and turn-key effective strategies to colleagues. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Data indicates the area our ENL students struggle with the most is writing. Summative assessment tools such as: in-class writing diagnostics; unit-ending Performance Assessments; NYSESLAT practice tests; and pre-Regents assessments enable ENL teachers to monitor student growth and assess trends over a longer period of time. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Inquiry teams analyze student work to identify areas of concern and to use data to design instructional interventions. The Language Allocation Team ensure that ENL students are receiving the appropriate amount of instruction based on their proficiency level. Common Planning Time is allotted for teachers to set goals, formulate interventions, and design instruction based on data collected. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) is used to identify the specific areas of need and support services to provide to our ENL students. Support services are aligned to intervention plans based on each student's performance on the NYSESLAT and on in-class assessments. Instruction and interventions consider and build upon our students' cultural background and experiences as well as their linguistic proficiency. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the NYSESLAT and regents exams are used to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. The EDAT is used to disaggregate data and identify trends and areas of concern, which are then used to guide instructional interventions and to make adjustments to our unit plans and student learning objectives. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our data specialist is responsible for gathering outcome assessment data and shares it with the ENL AP and coordinator. Professional development is scheduled with ENL teachers to analyze and discuss what the data reveals about students’ overall strengths and weaknesses, and its implications on instruction. This information is discussed with departmental APs and content-area teachers. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students' programs are determined by their proficiency level. Students are placed in an ungraded ESL support course, offered either two or four days weekly based on proficiency, or in heterogeneous integrated English classes with a dually certified English/ENL teacher. This is true for ISS/ENL self-contained students. Entering, Emerging, and Expanding (including SWD) students are given additional minutes of instruction through stand-alone ENL classes taught by a dually certified teacher English/ENL teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. 3  N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are placed in an ESL support class determined by their proficiency level to supplement their instructional time, ensuring the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to each student's proficiency model. This additional class meets either two or four times weekly, depending on students' needs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELL students receive instruction in all mandated content areas to meet the New York State graduation requirements. All classes are taught in English. Students are provided with glossaries, bilingual dictionaries, and our school library provides books in a variety of native languages. Mathematics: A number of programming, instructional and supportive strategies are currently in place, and these should be continued. ELLs are placed into mathematics classes based on their mathematics ability. Incoming students who take Algebra for the first time in the 2017-2018 school year will take a course leading to the Common Core Regents Exam. All other students will experience two Common Core Unit Tasks. Within each course, ELL students are programmed into the same section. In courses where the number of ELLs does not warrant a content area class, the ELLs are clearly identified for the teacher of a mixed ELL/general education class. ELLs who fail Regents exams are encouraged, as are SWD students, to retake these tests to raise their grades to fulfill diploma and Advanced Regents Diploma requirements. Tutoring is available each lunch period. ELLs are also encouraged to take more than the minimum mathematics required for graduation, and to participate in all department programs such as Advanced Placement classes in Statistics and Calculus, and College Now classes. All general education and SWD ELLs are taught by licensed teachers credentialed in mathematics to ensure students receive the proper preparation for standardized tests and the necessary credits for graduation. Instructional Implications: All ELLs receive instruction aligned with the Common Core Mathematics Standards. Teachers use the same text and resource materials for ELL and SWD classes. Mathematics teachers incorporate content and context vocabulary development as part of their lessons. Word walls or individual student vocabulary lists are developed. ELLs are encouraged to use bilingual glossaries, and to use supplementary glossaries, electronic calculators, or other materials. A greater emphasis in acquisition of English language mathematics vocabulary is needed in classes with ELLs. While student conversations in small group activities may also take place in the students’ language of preference, ELLs are also encouraged to share their mathematical thinking in both languages. ELL and SWD students in mathematics classes engage in hands-on learning. They use calculators and other manipulative devices, and are encouraged to utilize translated versions of exams, when available. Mathematics teachers encourage students to share their observations, strategies, and solutions in small groups and large group discussions. ELL and SWD students are encouraged to record definitions, observations, and strategies in their own words. Developing problem solving skills is an integral part of mathematics courses. The emphasis is on reading and analyzing problems for content, vocabulary, and mathematics information. Mathematical content is introduced and developed in real-world contexts. 4  Other Support Implications: ELLs are provided test modifications as mandated by the NYSED. They receive additional time on Regents Examinations and class tests, as needed. They have access to Regents Examinations in English and their native language, as available. Appropriate bilingual glossaries are available for class tests and Regents Examinations in mathematics. We monitor ELL student progress in mastering mathematics content throughout the year and their high school career. Tutoring before and after school, and during lunch periods, is available to provide additional small-group and individual support. Social Studies: Programming Implications: ELL content area classes follow the Social Studies New York State curriculum. Instructional implications: Content area instructors modify instruction to meet the needs of ELLs in a variety of scaffolding strategies including modeling and visualization. Instructors illustrate awareness on the many types of learning through the Danielson Framework. Differentiated instruction and cooperative learning activities is infused into classroom instruction. The Social Studies Department articulates with the ENL Coordinator in best ENL strategies. By assessing and discussing their needs, there is continued modification of curriculum and instruction so that ELLs can pass their statewide assessments. Opportunities are created for common planning time. Extended time is utilized. Instructors incorporate extensive social studies terminology and vocabulary. ELL students are given packets of Regents level material so that their ENL teachers can improve their writing skills to meet the rigor of the Common Core Standards. Instructors create interim goals to further identify needs of ELL students and create strategies to meet those needs. Other Supportive Implications: The following suggestions are made to increase the academic success of ELLs in their social studies content area classes: It is imperative that our social studies teachers be given continuous staff development concerning the different teaching techniques that must be used to modify the delivery of instruction for ELLs. Joint professional development is held between content area teachers and ENL Teachers. Because of this articulation, a frank discussion can be held on the needs of ELLs. A team effort is made so that professional practices including differentiated instruction reflects the ever-changing needs of our present and incoming ELL population by reviewing all the data available. Instructors will monitor the academic progression and attendance of ELL students in their social studies classes. Science: Generally, depending on students’ middle-school transcripts, ninth year students are programmed for Earth Science; tenth year students are programmed for Living Environment; eleventh year students are programmed for Chemistry; and twelfth year students are programmed for Physics. Instructional Implications: In assessing our beginning ELLs, science instructors have found that as a whole the students grasp material very slowly. They consequently have developed a program that incorporates the use of innovative technology and interactive presentations. We have found that the use of repetitive practice drills has been extremely effective as witnessed by improved standardized test scores for these learners. In additional, students are instructed on how to develop their own worksheets, puzzles, etc. In assessing our intermediate ELLs, science instructors have found that the aforementioned strategies are very useful. In addition to these instructional strategies extensive work in phonetics and vocabulary development is employed. The overall consensus is that our intermediate ELL students have a better acquisition of material. For our advanced ELLs material acquisition continues to improve. Science classes continue to employ all aforementioned 5  strategies. Included among these strategies is the use of content specific translation work as well as extensive usage of the dictionary. ENL/ENGLISH: As discussed earlier in this LAP, students are programmed according to the NYSESLAT score and grade level. ELLs are taught by licensed dually certified English and ENL instructors. Our ENL classes are self-contained. ENL classes parallel state curriculum. For example, 11th year ELLs are programmed for an American Literature/ELA Regents Preparation class. We differentiate instruction to ensure success by using a wide range of strategies and techniques based on individual need. Instructional Implications: The Common Core Learning Standards guide our instruction. Incoming ninth year ELLs take the Common Core Regents in their junior year. Both formal and summative assessments, and the expertise of the instructors who differentiate instruction based on the learning styles of our ELLs, are used to modify instruction. Instructors follow a parallel curriculum as indicated, ELA and ENL Standards, and are modified to meet the needs of our ELLs. Works of literature, non-fiction and informational text are selected based upon the language proficiency of our ELLs. Students with a higher level of English proficiency often work collaboratively with those less proficient. We use a variety of ENL methodologies and strategies including, but not limited to, scaffolding strategies such as modeling and bridging. Instruction is differentiated to ensure success in 21st Century skills: using computer technology for written work including research and the development of writing and editing skills. Collaborative learning ensures active student engagement: listening, note-taking, outlining, reading, quoting, paraphrasing, writing, responding to literature: including literary elements such as theme and poetic/literary devices, literature based projects to incorporate academic discourse. There is an extensive vocabulary instruction through a thematic approach using a variety of strategies including, but not limited to, technology, research, visual aids, and semantic mapping. Evidence of in class success is measured by the new teacher evaluation system: Danielson Framework. as well as all data reports. Strategies & Methodology for engaging ELL students: Project based learning; Thematic Units; Think Pair Share/group work/collaborative learning; Peer assessment; Role playing; Dramatic interpretations; Power Point Presentations; Data to create student centered/created goals; Process Writing; Literature to Informational Text connections; Direct instruction in both academic and content vocabulary; Using computer technology to develop writing and research skills; Creating context rich lessons with scaffolding. Instruction is differentiated to ensure Career and College Readiness as outlined in the Common Core Learning Standards: Our collaborative learning provides opportunities for English learners to interact with their peers and become engaged into receptive and productive language learning. Learning is designed on students’ strengths and weaknesses to ensure active student engagement. Language learning strategies include: buddy system to help the new second language learner become a member of the classroom society; writing response groups, students share their writing with one another, concentrate on what is good in the paper, and help one another improve their writing based on teacher’s modeling. Literature response groups, students use their own background knowledge to respond to literature and to valve students’ individual responses. This approach helps language learners become independent readers of literature. Cooperative groups are another strategy in which students are given specific roles and responsibilities for group work. Students become responsible for the success of one another, creating success for all members of the group. This builds individual and group responsibility for learning. Students develop into creative and active learners. Our cooperative learning methods are based heterogeneous groups in terms of ethnicity, gender, language proficiency and academic achievement. Also, teachers may balance groups in terms of personality characteristics: shy/outgoing, quiet/talkative group members have a chance to experience different learning and interaction styles. In preparing our students for state assessments, the State Rubrics are familiar to ELLs such as: ELA Regents Rubrics, covering meaning, development, organization, language use and conventions of standard English. Students are given extended time and can use bilingual dictionaries. Other Support Implications: Title III services are offered before school to help our students prepare for NYSESLAT. Before or after school programs are also available across the content areas. 6  The team effort of the AP English/ENL, ENL Coordinator, ENL instructors and guidance staff is invaluable. Aviation Technology: Programming Implications: The Aviation Maintenance Technology (AMT) Department meets the need of the English language Learner at every level by providing every student enrolled in the program with challenging and comprehensive Aviation Maintenance training, leading to Airframe and Powerplant certification as technicians. Our training is designed with the English learner in mind. It allows every English learner to meet the goals of language and technical proficiency requirements set forth by the state and the Federal Aviation Administration. This preparation motivates students to rise to the challenge of pursuing their dream of becoming language proficient and technologically advanced in the aviation and aerospace industry. Instructional Implications: The success of our ENL program is possible through the coordinated efforts of a very supportive content area staff, the development and implementation of a balanced curriculum that supports English as a second language and by creating a learning environment that is conducive to learning and social growth. When entering Aviation High School as freshmen, beginning English language learners are immediately programmed into our FAA program and cover the “General” curriculum. Here the goal is to expose students to aviation fundamentals, including a foundation in Mathematics and Physics, electricity, technical drawing, and career introduction. This beginning is supported by a strong foundation in aeronautical terms and practices in order for them to build the necessary aviation vocabulary in English, and best express their understanding of instruction in the content area. This is accomplished through speaking, listening, reading, and writing activities. Students classified as intermediate level English language learners are challenged to excel and to meet the demands of the Federal Aviation Administration by engaging in technologically and academically demanding training in the various aviation maintenance shops throughout the school. The instructors provide students with language enrichment through translation and a continuous emphasis on technical familiarization and career research. Intermediate level learners spend a significant amount of time in content area shops learning about career development, occupational studies, and the aerospace industry. At this level, students are mainly assisted in language development through the instructor, who utilizes modeling; eliciting, probing, restating, clarifying, questioning, and praising in order to help them meet the demands of the FAA program and to motivate them to succeed in the content area. A goal for the Advanced English learners is to participate in the more advanced Aviation Maintenance Technology program. Here they perform to higher level of expectations and meet the rigorous demands of the aviation career development program. They are provided with instruction that develops cognition, as well as challenging processing concepts activities. Individualized instruction is given to students of the ELL population in need of extra help. Tutoring is also offered to all Aviation Maintenance Technology ELL students. Various techniques and activities are utilized to help the ELL student, such as: jigsaw projects, vocabulary review jigsaws, double entry journals, round robin activities, and various other learning strategies. Here they must demonstrate proficiency in English as required by the Federal Aviation Administration and the industry. A goal that is set forth is the proficiency and total understanding that is required to think in a higher order, troubleshoot, read schematic, and analyze complex systems and circuits. Proficiency and total understanding is required to think in a higher order, troubleshoot, read schematic and analyze complex systems and circuits. All of these skills are necessary to best prepare the students for the oral and practical exam, which they must pass to certify as technician. Advanced students are also provided with the opportunity to peruse internships in the different aerospace industries with whom we have a partnership with. This is the final phase before they become fully qualified as aircraft technician and move onto higher education or the aerospace industry. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We have a freestanding ENL Program. Students are not tested in their home language. 7  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status (A) For our SIFE students:N/A - We have no SIFE students.(B) Newcomer:Students are given bilingual dictionaries and subject specific glossaries, and are also paired with students who have a greater mastery of English. Students are given different roles in activities based on their mastery of English.(C) Developing: Students are given bilingial dictionaries and subject specific glossaries, and are also paired with students who have a greater mastery of English. Students are assigned different roles within classroom activities based on their mastery of English. Students work with graphic organizers to assist with their classroom based on the four skills: listening, reading, writing, speaking.(D) Long Term:Using NYSESLAT data to identify of individual needs and targeting specific areas of weakness. All of our Long Term ELL students are also students with disabilities, therefore strategic differentiation is coordinated with the Special Education Department.(E) Former ELLs:Former ELLs are given extended time on all examinations and can use glossaries on all assessments.With this sub-group, we focus on their College and Career Readiness.We support students who have not obtained a 75 on the ELA Regents and a 70 on the Algebra Regents by providing them after school tutoring before retaking the Regents.We encourage former ELLs to take Advanced Placement and College Now classes.We also connect our most academically vulnerable former ELLs with a mentor teacher to ensure they meet all graduation requirements. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instruction is differentiated based on individual students' English proficiency level and in accordance with their IEP. Instructional strategies such as Collaborative Strategic Reading (CSR), the use of graphic organizers, manipulatives, video and audio resources, and access to individual laptop computers provide access to academic content and accelerate language development. Teachers also use the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) to address the academic needs of ENL students, and the socratic seminar model to enhance students' speaking and listening skills. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are offered extended time on exams, have exams read aloud, and are allowed to type rather than hand-write papers, depending on their proficiency level and recommendations in their IEPs. Cooperative coteaching and tutoring are also available. Our ELL-SWDs are provided with the same curriculum as general education students, though modifications are made to ensure the least restrictive environment for each student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our long term ELL students are also students with disabilities, and that their English language proficiency is not accurately reflected by their NYSESLAT scores. These students are offered instruction targeting NYSESLAT test preparation in addition to the required hours of ELL instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Data indicates that all of our long term ELL students are also students with disabilities, and that their English language proficiency is not accurately reflected by their NYSESLAT scores. Based on data and trends, we would like to use Title III funds to create a support class in Mathematics. Data also shows the greatest area of weakness our students have on the NYSESLAT is Writing, we will increase targeted writing skills reinforcement and writing workshops for students most in need. In addition, we plan to expand our pre-NYSESLAT tutoring for our long-term ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We don’t have a bilingual program. 8  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Through Title III funding, ELL students receive supplemental support in Earth Science and AMT. These classes ensure that students don’t fall behind in with their course work. Immigration Funds are used to connect academically vulnerable ELL students with mentor teachers who ensure these students are passing their classes, are meeting graduation requirements, and are college and career ready. We also host workshops for ELL students focused on post-secondary education and financial aid opportunities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The Collections textbook used in English classes includes an online component, which provides spoken audio versions of texts. Audio and video supplementary materials, differentiated texts, and bilingual dictionaries and content-specific glossaries are used to support ELL students. Computer access is available to students to access online resources and translation as needed. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We make every attempt to include correspondence with students’ guardians in their home language. We use the Office of Translation Services to translate information we share with parents. Students are supported in their home language by using bilingual dictionaries and content-specific glossaries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We have a very small ELL population. The ENL AP, ENL coordinator, AP of Guidance, and Program Chairperson ensure that each ELL student is provided with the appropriate supports and resources for academic success in correspondance with their age and grade level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share our building with another school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our AP of Pupil Services facilitates our freshman orientation in late June prior to the school year. The Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, and our Coordinator of Student Activities (COSA) present the full gamut of our program including all extracurricular activities. Programs and extracurricular activities are open to all students. Student representatives from ROTC and other clubs also speak. Students from our various clubs and organizations give our incoming students guided tours of the building and answer all questions our new students may have. Each student takes a Math Placement Assessment and Spanish Placement Assessment to ensure that students are programmed in an appropriate math and Spanish class according to their abilities. Moreover, incoming ELL students meet with the ENL AP, ENL coordinator, grade-level guidance counselor and Parent Coordinator. We provide them with printed translations of the orientation materials such as "How to Get Back on Track", a pamphlet created by our guidance department, and we give them an overview of the ENL program, for example, why they may be receiving additional classes; what entitlements are afforded to them as ENL students; and testing out of ELL status. If a student enrolls during the year, the ENL coordinator will welcome the student and provide him/her with all the information that was presented during the orientation meeting. 9  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? As a CTE school, we offer a one year Course I Spanish class and a one year Heritage Spanish Class. Students take a placement exam to determine which class is appropriate to their level. We offer Advanced Placement English Language & Composition, Advanced Placement English Literature & Composition, journalism, and drama; and College Now classes—Remedial English and English 101. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We have four licensed ENL teachers. All content area teachers are fully licensed in their content area. Professional Development Workshops are offered by the ENL AP and ENL Coordinator for pedagogic and non-pedagogic staff equally.The AP English/ENL forwards all DELLS e-mail offerings directly to the ENL Teacher Team.This is our planned professional development for our ENL teachers:ELL—Teacher Team: Mr. Sirena (Department Coordinator); Ms. Iacovou, (ENL Coordinator); Ms. Haloulos (ENL teacher); Ms. Ritter (ENL teacher); Ms. Musici (ENL teacher); Ms. Slater (ISS/ENL teacher), and Ms. Guillen (ISS/ENL teacher). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers who have ELL students attend workshops with the ENL Supervisor and Coordinator to address the needs of ELL students, especially incoming ELLs. We focus on helping teachers utilize strategies for content specific vocabulary instruction, reading comprehension, and engaging students in classroom discussion. See question 1 for PD topics schedule for ELL teachers.Teachers receive the mandated 15% PD for ELL students in many ways. We provide workshops connecting with ELL issues on Chancellor PD days. Department APs will use two PD meetings (one per semester) to address the needs of ELL students.Meeting agendas and attendance are collected and stored with Department Supervisors. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL coordinator and the guidance department arrange an annual meeting with the guardians of ELL students to discuss their student’s performance on the previous year’s NYSESLAT examination, discuss the student’s current level of progress, and areas of concern. Guardians are informed of tutoring options, support classes, interventions, and related services. Parents will also be informed about class placement choices students have the following academic year. 0  If a parent is not able to attend a scheduled meeting, the guidance counselor and ENL coordinator will hold a telephone meeting with the parent. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We encourage ELL guardians to be fully involved with our school. Announcements and updates are also posted on the school’s website at www.aviationhs.net. ELL guardians are encouraged regularly to visit this site for up-to-date information. Parents receive a flier during freshman orientation with the website address and are reminded via emails and during well attended events such as Parent/teacher conferences and monthly Parents Association Meetings to log on to the website for updates and announcements. Through our website, parents are encouraged to sign up for Parent Email alerts. Upon registration, parents provide their email address which is then added to a contact list. Parents receive emails regularly informing them of upcoming events such as meetings, conferences, report card distribution, etc. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Aviation High School is located in Long Island City, Queens. Our ELLs have equal access to all programs including the opportunity to earn two FAA licenses in Powerplant and Airframe upon completion of our 5th Year Honors program. Aviation’s unique technical training provides all students with unlimited vocational and academic possibilities through our FAA Approved Aviation Maintenance Technology Program. It is the largest public school in the United States that provides our ELLs with a high quality academic education as well as the rigorous FAA approved Aviation Maintenance Technology program leading to Airframe and Powerplant license certification. Visitors from around the country and from around the world visit us to see our exemplary program. 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Steven Jackson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Aviation High School School DBN: 24Q610 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Steven R. Jackson Title Principal Justin Foley Assistant Principal Noemi Rodriquez Parent Coordinator Elizabeth Ritter ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Andrea Haloulos Teacher/Subject Area Meghan Slater Teacher/Subject Area Phryne Iacovou Peter Sirena Coach Coach Michael Koumoullos School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ken Weinberg Other Data Specialist Pat Browne Other APO Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/25/17 10/25/17 10/25/17 10/25/17 10/25/17 10/25/17 10/25/17 10/25/17 10/25/17 10/25/17 10/25/17 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 24Q610 School Name: Aviation High School Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. ATS reports, Student Emergency Cards 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred AL,AM,AR,BE,BG,BM,BS,CA,CE,CH,CN,DA,FR,GJ,GK,HA,HG,HI,IL,IN,IT,JA,KO,KS,ML,MN,MR,MY,NE,NO,PA,PI,PJ,PL,PO,RO,RU,SC,SF,SI,SL,SP,TA,TG,TH,TI,TU,UD,UR,VC,VN,WO, Language 4  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. welcome letter (09/09/15), Parent-Teacher Conference Letter (11/12/15), Academic Intervention Letter (11/02/15, 02/08/15), Principal's Mailing (09/11/15), FAA Letter (03/15/15), Testing letters (01/19/15) 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-Teacher Conference, College Information Night, Open House, 5 th Year Meeting, Parent Association Meetings, Attendance Teacher & Guidance Counselor 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 5  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Documents are posted & emailed to explain the services for translation, as well as offer the links. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? End of year parent survey & discussions with the Parent Coordinator. 6 
