 28Q620 School Name: THOMAS A. EDISON CAREER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION HIGH SCHOOL Principal: MOSES OJEDA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Thomas Alva Edison CTE High School 28Q620 342800011620 9-12 School Number (DBN): 165-65 84 th Avenue Jamaica, New York 11432 (718) 297.6580 718-658-0365 Phone Number: Fax: Moses Ojeda Mojeda3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Moses A. Ojeda Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Vivian Nobile-Esposti Yvette Small Moses Ojeda Yvette Small N/A District Information Geographical District: 28 Juan Mendez Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing, Ny 11354 Superintendent’s Office Address: JMendez2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 218-7696 Phone Number: (718) 281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Queens South Marlene Wilks FSC: Executive Director:   82-01 RockawayBoulevard Ozone Park, NY 11416 Executive Director’s Office Address: MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-520-6743 Phone Number: 718-281-3509 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Moses A. Ojeda Vivian Nobile-Esposti Yvette Small Rose Funderburk N/A Gina Paulson NavindraHaripersaud SherryCharan Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable CSARepresentative UFTRepresentative Parent Representative   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alison Bruce Alexander Mohamed Yar Stacey Williams Chad Perry SakiaQuayum Parent Representative Parent Representative Parent Representative Student Representative Student Representative Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Thomas A. Edison Career and Technical Education High School is to develop leaders of tomorrow by preparing all students to meet the high academic, technical, civic and workforce challenges of the twenty-first century. We believe that strong leadership throughout our united community of faculty members, students, parents and associates will move us towards the following goals: academic rigor, high standards for assessing students' performances and continual school improvement.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Thomas A. Edison is one of 44 Career and Technical Education High School in New York City. Our Mission Statement is to develop the leaders of tomorrow by preparing all students to meet the high academic, technical, civic, and workforce challenges of the twenty first century. We believe strong leadership throughout our united community of faculty members, students, parents, and associates will move us toward the following goals: Academic Rigor, High Standards for assessing students’ performance and continual school improvement. We populate 2100 students from grade 9 through grade 12 which is comprised of 18.89% Black, 23.09% Hispanic, 4.39% White, and 46.56% % Asian students. The student body includes 2.1 % English language learners and 12.4% special education students. Boys account for 64.6% of the students enrolled and girls account for 35.4%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 93.1%. Currently we offer 7 CTE Programs leading to 11 CTE Pathways (the most of any CTE school in NYC), all of which culminate with a state recognized industry certification. These include but are not limited to:  Automotive -maintain and repair automobiles  Collision and Refinishing - detailing, damage analysis, and repair  IT and Inter-networking -students maintain and repair our computers, printers, projectors and our wired and wireless infrastructure.  Commercial Art-students develop works of the art that re displayed throughout the school  Graphic Arts-provide all of the printing for the school in form of banners, booklets, posters, and handouts  Web Design-responsible for the design, maintaining, and updating of our school website  Robotics-students work in teams to research, design, and construct machines.  Electrical Installation-wiring simple circuits and low voltage circuits. Our school has become one of the most in-demand CTE schools in New York City with over 7,000 applications yearly. We pride ourselves in preparing our students to be truly college and career ready upon graduation; over 94% of our students go on to a post-secondary education and/or a career path. All students are provided with the opportunity to obtain a state recognized industry certification in their CTE course of study. Therefore, students graduating from our school leave with two diplomas; the High School Diploma validating their academic skills and the Endorsed CTE Diploma validating their industry skills. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Instructional Support Services at Thomas Edison High School offers students with Individualized Education Plans the following programs: Self-Contained Classes, Integrated Co-teaching classes, Special Education Teacher Support Services and Related Services. We also offer one Life Skills class; a 12:1 which is offered to students who meet a specific criteria. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  When reviewing the Framework for Great Schools, the following is noted:  Thomas A. Edison CTE High School: o Rigorous Instruction: Score of Good o Collaborative Teachers: Score of Good o Supportive Environment: Score of Good o Effective School Leadership: Score of Excellent o Strong Family-Community Ties: Score of Fair o Trust: Score of Fair 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 28Q620 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 2133 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 171 155 11 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 67 49 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 69.9% % Reduced Lunch 2.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 5.4% 23.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.1 1% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 94% 90% 86.4% 32.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES No N/A 185 103 78 93.0% 10.8% 13.0% 19.0% 47.0% 6.2% 18 17% 6.3 N/A N/A 95% 92% 92.9% 41% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A YES YES NO N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment Data Source: RESI, ATS, Graduation Tracker by Cohort, NYSED Report Card, Testing Data, School Quality Guide, School Snapshot, and 2016-17 Quality Review. Strengths: The school has a 93% graduation rate, above the city-wide average. Students surpass the city-wide average of credit accumulation in all grades. Attendance in the school is 93%. However, a careful review of the data sources listed above indicates several achievement gaps in our College and Career Readiness Index including meeting the needs of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Needs: 2016-17 Quality Review indicated pedagogy (1.2), curricula (1.1) and assessment (2.2) alignment to Common Core Standards as a rating of "Proficient" making it an area of focus for the school. STARS data indicates there is a need for improving the College and Career Readiness benchmarks in Mathematics achievement. Weighted Regents Pass rates indicate there is a need in for improvement in Algebra and Global History compared to borough wide averages. Mathematics- ATS Testing Data reveals mathematics achievement data is an area of improvement. Perception survey indicates needs for increased parent engagement, collaboration of teachers and staff development for social and emotional needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will implement our instructional foci by increasing the quality of pedagogy and the quantity of writing across all content areas which will result in a 3% increase in the percentage of student College and Career Readiness standards including ELLs and SWDs as measured by weighted Regents pass rates in all core academic subject areas. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher teams will meet weekly with a particular focus on integrating common pre and post assessments and analyzing item analysis assessments of past Regents, as well as SAT and PSAT exams. Use Data Assessment Tools such as item analysis of SAT and PSAT exams to guide instruction to identify trends and make classroom-level decisions with regard to student and key subgroup performance, e.g., Grade Cam and IO Education. All teachers Sept -June 2019 All teachers Sept-June 2019 Core subject teachers, APs Supervision, and Principal Teachers Lead Teacher/Coach Offer after school tutoring, Princeton Review SAT Prep, as well as peer tutoring (National Honors Society) during lunch periods in all core subject areas. Students Oct-June 2019 Small group targeted Regents tutoring for SWDs (Students with Disabilities) and ENLs (English Language Learners SWD & ENL Students Oct-June 2019 Ongoing observations to ensure the instructional foci is embedded into daily instruction. Teachers Students will be exposed to various types of essays such as argumentative, narrative, expository, and analytical. Students Sept- June 2019 Sept-June 2019 APs Principal AP Guidance APs Supervision Principal AP Supervisions AP Guidance Principal APs Supervision English Teachers AP English 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4  The PTA, as well as the school (Assistant Principals and teachers), will offer workshops to families to better familiarize and understand the impact of standardized testing to improve student college and career readiness from October 2018 to June 2019. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teacher/supervisor per session, per diem, instructional materials, professional development coaches, professional development training vendors; partnership grants. Math and special education teachers, along with the Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, will implement the above strategies. Administration will meet with teachers during after-school department meetings to include teachers in the decision making process regarding the use and effectiveness of the above strategies. As a Title I School-wide Program, Conceptual Consolidation will allow us to combine Federal and local funds such as Fair Student Funding (Tax Levy), Title I Funds to implement this action plan from September 2018-June 2019 as indicated below: 2. Per Session/ Coverages-For Regents Tutoring leading up to January and June Regents Exams- from September to June. 3. Textbooks and informational resources- digital and hard copy to support Regents bound courses. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Examine Regents results, cohort data to inform programming and impact end of year graduation statistics for 2017-2018 school year. 2. Data from on-going assessments and mid-term exams will be used to inform instruction, after school tutoring and resources for student achievement. 3. January Regents results will be assessed to review progress in English 4. SAT/PSAT and Naviance data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Update on progress toward goal (including specific action plan items) reported monthly at School Leadership Team to be reflected in the minutes of the meeting, 5  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: Attendance is 93%, above the city average. Peer Group Connection program that supports and eases students’ transition from middle to high school. This program taps into the power of older students to create a nurturing environment for incoming freshmen. Needs: According to the 2017-18 NYC School Survey report, - 60% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers help them catch up if they are behind. - 58% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. - 64% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers give them specific suggestions about how they can improve their work in class. - 67% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers explain things a different way if they don’t understand something in class. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers and administrators will collaborate with the Guidance Counselors, PGC, and ACE in order to improve the social-emotional well being and growth of all students which will result in a 3% increase in the percentage of students who respond positively in regards to teacher student interactions. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Improve tutoring offerings by including peer tutoring through the National Honors Society during all lunch periods, as well as after school tutoring in all subject classes to further enhance the supportive environment at Edison. Teachers Students Oct- June 2019 AP Guidance APs Supervision Small group targeted Regents tutoring for SWDs (Students with Disabilities) and ENLs (English Language Learners SWD & ENL Oct-June Principal 2019 The ACE initiative will be expanded this year. The committee will continue to facilitate monthly lottery drawings and students will receive rewards and chances to share their story about how they received the wristband (if their number is selected in the drawing). Stories of acts of kindness will be showcased in the school newspaper and website. Will facilitate a college and career readiness center to drive student motivation in academic achievement, as well as college exploration in freshman and sophomore students. Naviance and other technology will be used to facilitate correspondence and distribution of information. We will continue to offer parent/student workshops and events during evenings and on Saturdays to foster stronger relationships between the school, families, and the community. A representative from the Guidance team, as well as one Assistant Principal, Supervision/Administration will attend each PTA Meeting to discuss and update parents on pupil personnel services and happenings. Teachers will be trained on various approaches to incorporate into their lessons in order to help SWD and ELL students meet success in their academic and CTE classes. This professional Teachers Nov-June 2019 8 AP Supervisions AP Guidance Students Monthly Principal APs Teachers Guidance ACE Committee Principal AP, PPS GCs Students Sept - June 2019 Comm Monthly Guidance Orgs PTA Parents Monthly Principal GCs APs APs Teachers learning session will help teachers improve student engagement, especially among the ELLs. Guidance Counselors will be provided Professional Development opportunities on Instructional Support Related topics to help all SWD and ELL students meet success in their academic and CTE classes. Expand the PGC (Peer Group Connection) program to increase student involvement by creating a nurturing environment for incoming freshmen to strengthen relationships among students across all grades. Guidance Counselors Oct-June 2019 Guidance AP ISS Students September - June 2019 PGC APs Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will provide monthly parent sessions with the principal, teacher/guidance counselor(s) led professional workshops with a focus on social emotional strategies to support their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  9-12 Grade-level assemblies for Students (School Day) and Parents (After-School)  Monthly ACE Meetings  Jewish Board Case Manager to make home visits and work with families Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point Benchmark: By March 2019, 100% of students will be administered and complete a student satisfaction and support survey administered by Guidance counselors in an effort to understand areas of strength, need, and focus areas to improve their overall well being, Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Survey results, NYC Survey results, Student Attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: Teachers Teams have a common planning time programmed into their schedules by department and content area. Needs: 2016-17 Quality Review indicated teacher team collaboration (4.2) as a rating of "Proficient" making it an area of focus for the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will expand the organization of teacher teams to allow for increased focus on cross-curricular coherence, differentiation, common planning, professional development and student engagement. During the 2018-19 school year at least 80% of teachers and counselors will be participating in a team to address these areas. Teacher teams will also be implementing protocols to assess and follow through on the impact of student work in order to to meet their needs as well as individualized instruction. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? To implement the inclusion of the re-purposed workday as per the 2014 UFT Teacher’s Contract, Thomas A. Edison CTE High School will request approval for a School-Based Option to implement 80 minute Professional Development in addition to 35 minutes of Parent Engagement Activities, and other professional work. Teachers APs Oct-June 2019 Teachers teams will collaborate, share feedback and fine-tune their developing student assessment systems, including exhibitions, portfolios, and design projects, as well as recognizing the complexities involved in developing new forms of assessment. This collaborative reflection will help educators design and refine their assessment systems, and supports higher quality student performance. Meeting minutes will be reviewed by the Assistant Principal to ensure that the implementation of Instructional Foci are followed through. Teachers Sept-June 2019 Literary works and supplemental readings studied within the English classes will align with the Social Studies curriculum Eng & SS Departments Sept-June 2019 Principal APs Teachers PD Committee Teachers APs Supervision SS Teachers Eng Teachers AP SS & Eng 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will provide monthly parent sessions with the principal, teacher/guidance counselor(s) led professional workshops with a focus on teacher team strategies being implemented to support their children. Jewish Board will provide family sessions regarding social-emotional topics. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1   Per Session for teachers  OTPS Funds to Provide PD  80 Minute Teacher Team and PD sessions will take place on Wednesdays of the month  Teachers will be programmed throughout the day to have a common planning period to work as grade level teams.  College Access for All funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teacher Departmental Teams Teachers / Departmental Coordinators and Principal/Assistant Principals and the Professional Development Team meet during the school day, as well as once per month after school to evaluate the effectiveness of the PD schedule and whether subject level departmental goals are being achieved. Teachers are engaged in the process of using Data Assessment Tools on a daily basis as part of their regular practice of interacting with our Learning Management System. Specific Professional Development Sessions and have been developed and are being used to model and capture proper usage of these Data Tools amongst the aforementioned constituents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Update on progress toward goal (including specific action plan items) reported monthly at School Leadership Team to be reflected in the minutes of the meeting. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: Continue participation in the Learning Partners Program to help each other using the philosophy of " the answer is in the room." The schools will develop a Problem Of Practice (POP) based on a common needs assessment in which they analyze data patterns that are in need of improvement(s). The POP will be the main theme used during the inter-visitations used to set up areas of need or areas in which schools would like feedback, for example, teacher team meetings, ICT efficacy, or leadership roles. Needs: Our POP is, “Not enough students are graduating college and career ready". The goal being that the discussions, observable feedback, and adjustments should lead to better instruction, higher standardized test results and higher graduation rates in all three schools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the College and Career Readiness (CCR) as indicated in the School Quality Snapshot will increase by 3% as compared to the CCR cohort data from 2016-2017. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Will continue to implement the LINCT Program in English. LINCT school-based program designed to support student, teachers, and counselors to support the deeper development of academic literacy so that eligible high school seniors can begin college better prepared for college-level coursework; and provide resources for teachers and counselors to help these students navigate the college research, application, and matriculation process better prepared for persistence and success Re-administer Math & ELA Regents with the anticipation of decreasing the amount of remedial classes taken in college. ELA Students Nov-June 2019 AP ELA ELA Teachers AP Guidance Guidance Counselors Math & ELA Jan 2019 & AP Math & ELA Students June 2019 Students will be scheduled to take more Science Regents exams with the anticipation of earning an Advanced Regents diploma. Science Students Dec - May 2019 Guidance Department will push in to subject classes to implement lesson regarding the college process and drive motivation in academic classes, as well as encourage 9th and 10th graders into college exploration. Naviance and other technologies will be used. College and Career Center will provide special topic workshops (applications, financial aid, etc.) Students Nov-June 2019 Teacher Teams will collaborate, share feedback and fine-tune their developing student assessment systems, including exhibitions, portfolios, and design projects, as well as recognizing the complexities involved in developing new forms of assessment. This collaborative reflection will help educators Teachers Nov-June 2019 Math & ELA Teachers AP Guidance Guidance Counselors AP Science Science Teachers AP Guidance Guidance Counselors Teachers APs Supervision Guidance AP Guidance Teachers APs Supervision 4 design and refine their assessment systems, and supports higher quality student performance. Meeting minutes will be reviewed by the Assistant Principal to ensure that the implementation of Instructional Foci are followed through. ENL/ISS Department will target subgroups for targeted tutoring ISS Students Nov-June AP ISS 2019 In collaboration with Queensborough Community College, implement Accuplacer Prepatory material into Pre-Algebra 2 classes culminating in students taking the Accuplacer exam. Math Department Nov-June 2019 ISS Teachers GCs AP Math Math Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will provide monthly parent sessions with the principal, teacher/guidance counselor(s) led professional workshops with a focus on College and Career Readiness strategies being implemented to support their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  OTPS funds to provide PD for teachers, software, and textbooks  80 Minute PD sessions will take place on Wednesdays of the month Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - January regents will be analyzed for those retaking the ELA and Math examination to meet CCR - College surveys administered through Naviance Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Update on progress toward goal (including specific action plan items) reported weekly at Cabinet meetings to be reflected in the minutes of the meeting. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: The School Leadership Team and the Parent Association Executive Board have surveyed the parents and they are requesting teacher outreach occur more often in regards to information on students’ performance. Needs: - 77% of parents/guardians responded that since the beginning of the school year, they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance sometimes or often. - 85% of parents feel that teachers understand families' problems and concerns. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Edison will generate a rise in frequent communication between staff and parents, while expanding its ties to the community.9 This will all create: a 2% monthly increase, as compared to last year in IO Education anecdotal log entries (which reflect contact between staff and parents); an increase in staff appointments with parents; and an increase in attendance at parent events. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be given access codes to make outside calls. Phone logs will be collected and reviewed to ensure communication between teacher and parent is being implemented effectively. Parents Nov-June 2019 Staff and parents will use Skedula/PupilPath as the main tool to communicate student progress across all subject areas. Community Oct- June 2019 Staff will be offered PD opportunities to gain knowledgeable about gathering and disseminating student data, which will lead to a more informed school community. Parents Students Community Oct-June 2019 Parents Students Teachers will be afforded 35 minutes every Wednesday for parental outreach, as well as 1 hour and 55 minutes once a month for teacher/parent/guidance meetings. Parents Oct-June 2019 Hire a Parent Coordinator to work with the principal to address parent issues and concerns at the school, conduct outreach to engage parents in their children’s education, and strengthen parent involvement in their children’s education Parents Sept-June 2019 Increase community collaboration with outside industries and educational agencies. Community Sept-June 2019 Parents Students Prinicpal APs Teachers Principal APs Guidance Teachers Principal APs Guidance Teachers Teachers Parents Guidance Principal APs Guidance Teachers Principal APs 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our school will provide monthly parent sessions with the principal, teacher/guidance counselor(s) led professional workshops with a focus on using PupilPath to support their children's academic progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher, Guidance Counselor, and Supervisor Per Session to provide workshops for parents  OTPS funds for supplies, software, and equipment Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Sign in sheets from family related information sessions will be evaluated to see if there was an increase in parent involvement as compared to last years attendance (2016-2017). Monitor the monthly IO Education interaction between parents and teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Student(s) identified through Guidance referral Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Student(s) identified through Guidance referral Failing Grade in Course Failing Grade in Course IEP IEP Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and Saturday school . During the school day and before the school day. Double period classes of read aloud, think aloud, and talk aloud. Classroom instruction with 1 Gen Ed English teacher and 1 ISS teacher. Supplemental classes in which students are offered the opportunity to practice reading/writing skills across the content areas. Small group instruction and individualized tutoring. Small group instruction. Peer-to-peer tutoring, teacher tutoring and additional instructional period(s). Student(s) identified through Guidance referral Tutoring and Supplemental Advanced Placement calculus class Failing Grade in Course Mathematics Science IEP Student(s) identified through Guidance referral Failing Grade in Course IEP ICT (Integrated Collaborative Teaching), Science Honor Society, Tutoring, and Circular 6 assignment Classroom instruction with 1 Gen Ed Science teacher and 1 ISS teacher. Peer-to-peer tutoring, Teaching tutoring, One-to-one tutoring, During the school day and on Saturday 9  Social Studies Student(s) identified through Guidance referral Failing Grade in Course ICT (Integrated Collaborative Teaching), Tutoring, In-class preparation, Teacher professional development IEP At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) During and after the school day and Saturday. Two weekends of intense preparation focused on regents. Individual counseling and/or group counseling, Tutoring, Interdisciplinary meetings, Access of records and Referrals, 504 accommodations, and Interventions. During and after the school day and Saturday. Two weekends of intense preparation focused on regents. During the school day, after school (PM school) and Saturday and Small group tutoring. One-to-one tutoring, Peer-to-peer tutoring, Teacher tutoring, Accommodate students with resources, sample exams and review books, Teacher instruction focus on State curriculum, Edu-game software utilized in the classroom, Ongoing meetings on test-taking strategies and topics that appear on exams, On-line course, After school courses, Classroom instruction with 1 Gen Ed Social Studies teacher and 1 ISS teacher. Services are provided based on assessment of data culled for each student and response to referrals made by other professional staff members. Report cards, transcripts, attendance and deans’ records are reviewed to identify strengths and weaknesses. Weaknesses are addressed with student and/or parent. Peer-to-peer tutoring. Teacher tutoring. Meeting with guidance counselor, student, parent, and 0  on occasion, staff member. Teacher, student, parent, social worker and psychologist 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Although we have over 90% of highly qualified teachers, we will continue to reach out to obtain only those teachers that are qualified to teach in New York City. This includes attending job fairs, as well as reaching out to our Human Resource contact in our Borough Field Support Center. We have developed a strong relationship with the local colleges and have increased our student teacher program. We will continue to work with our industry partners. Through our Professional Development Committee we will implement instructional workshops based on teacher needs as suggested through surveys. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development is ongoing for our entire staff. The focus is questioning, student engagement, assessments, and common core mini tasks. Staff is trained by outside vendors, as well as by the administration. We also utilize our Borough Field Support Center to assist in planning high quality professional development to meet the needs of our staff. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 4  N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  Teacher teams meet weekly to analyze student work, create and evaluate common assessments and adjust instruction according to the student' needs  Teachers comprise a professional Development Committee in which they survey the teachers to determine the various needs of the faculty. The suggestions then guide a number of Professional Learning sessions throughout the school year. In addition, teachers have access to the UFT Teacher Center where professional materials related to the various Professional Learning topics are shared with the teachers  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Rigorous Instruction Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 949,54500 X 5  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 10,583,871.00 X X X X Supportive Environment Collaborative Teachers Strong Family & Community Ties X X X Rigorous Instruction Supportive Environment Effective School Leadership Strong Family & Community Ties 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 6   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Thomas A. Edison Career and Technical High School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Thomas A. Edison Career and Technical High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary School Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Thomas A. Edison Career and Technical High School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection 0  and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary School (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 1  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Elementary and Secondary School Act Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 3  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The students reading and writing skills will be strengthened through a small group instruction session. These sessions will include listening, speaking, reading and writing with the focus of the sessions being reading and writing. Close reading and the use of evidence-based textual information will be emphasized during the small group sessions. In addition, through the use of graphic organizers, students will be taught strategies to improve their comprehension skills. The information contained in the graphic organizers will then be cited in their written text. In addition, students will be taught the conventions of the English language; this includes grammar, capitalization, and punctuation. Students will also be instructed on sentence structure, the organization of paragraphs and essays. All grade levels will be served including former ELLs. Students will meet twice per week on an ongoing basis throughout the school year. All classes will be taught in English, as these students are registered in an ESL program. The program will be manned by four teachers - one of which is a licensed ESL teacher, one who is a licensed English teacher, one math, and one who is a licensed social studies and Special Educaiton teacher. With their knowledge and years of experience, these students will receive the highest quality education with individualized attention. Various materials will be used for this program and Regent preparation will be included. Monetary Break Down: The Instructional program session: $7278.00 (59%) English Regent Review Tuesday & Thursday 2:30 - 4:30 Social Studies Regent Review Monday & Wednesday 2:30 - 4:30 Total of 60 Sessions: 60x2 hrs x $60.65 = $7278.00 in teacher per-session Sessions would run from November 5th - January 18th and from April 2nd - June 14th Parents will be notified via Skedula, telephone calls in home language and through U.S. Mail. Attendance Records and Agendas will be kept via sign in sheets as well as Stars Attendance. We will add the tutoring sessions to the student programs so that attendance can be taken and visible to parents on Skedula. Parental Involvement: 10% = $1236.00 We will hold college information night for ENL parents and students to assist with college application process and information. A guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Teacher translators will be present Meeting 1 will be held in October from 5:00 - 7:00 and Meeting 2 will be held in March from 5:00 - 7:00 GC Per-session: $65.20 x 4hours x 2 GCs = $522.00 Supervisor Per-session: $63.45 x 4 hours= $254.00 Translation Per-session: $60.65 x 4 hours x 2 teachers = $460.00 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers have participated in and will continue to participate in a number of Professional Development activities. One such PD activity will be full day Read 180 training for the new program being implemented. Once the program is implemented and running, additional ELLs will be provided this reading intervention instruction to improve literacy skills. Professional Development: (10%) $1236 We will schedule Read 180 Coaching session for September 2018 to train new Read 180 teachers. The coaching session takes place on one full day. The program is a targeting reading program that will support the ENL students who also have IEPs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: At the beginning of the school year, parents were invited to attend an Orientation Session, which introduced them to the school, its administration and policies. Parents were welcomed to the school and informed of various people they should contact for questions and assistance. In addition, parents will be invited to attend various workshops focusing on college admissions for English Language Learners. Topics to be discussed include the admissions process as well as financial aide. Parental Engagement College Session (10%) $1236 Meeting 1 will be held in October from 5:00 - 7:00 and Meeting 2 will be held in March from 5:00 - 7:00 7 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities GC Per-session: $65.20 x 4hours x 2 GCs = $522.00 Supervisor Per-session: $63.45 x 4 hours= $254.00 Translation Per-session: $60.65 x 4 hours x 2 teachers = $460.00 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. This will cover the per-session salaries of the licensed ESL and content area teachers for small group instruction. These monies will be used to underwrite the cost of sending the teachers to the professional development sessions that were listed. These funds will be used for various Parent Engagement activities. These funds will be used for full- day teacher coaching provided by Scholastic on Read 180, a reading intervention program. There will be a number of materials purchased through these funds including instructional materials to be used in the co-teaching classrooms, books and an audio book library for use in Read 180. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $7420.00 $1236.00 Purchased services  High quality staff 1236.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2473.00 0 0 0 12367.00 8  9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 28 School Name Thomas Edison C T E HS Borough Queens School Number 620 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Moses Ojeda Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ismene Petroutsos Teacher/Subject Area Nancy Lavin/English Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Patricia Minogue Coach School Counselor Kristin Bellomo Parent Shariffa Doman Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 2159 0 Total number of ELLs 29 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.34%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Once identified as English Language Learners they are enrolled in the ENL class. In addition, Skedula is consulted for each student’s academic history; this includes their 8th grade scores in ELA and math. In addition to the above data, the students' transcripts are consulted to review the results of each student’s Regents exams. Students’ programs are then checked to ensure they are properly programmed into classes where differentiated instruction is a priority. In addition, they are offered assistance in preparing for the Regents exams for which they are scheduled to sit in January or June. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 1  The success of the ESL program is first evaluated on the results of the NYSESLAT Exam. During the course of the years, students have successfully met the rigorous criteria of the exam, and many have been designated Proficient/Commanding. This has helped our school meet the AYP goals on our school's report card. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After reviewing the NYSESLAT data, it is evident that at least half of the students scored in the proficient range for the listening/speaking segment of the exam. In contrast, a limited number of students scored “Commanding” in the reading/writing modalities. Historically, at our school, General Education ELLs tend to test out sooner or achieve higher scores that ELLs with disabilities. More specifically, Alternate Assesment ELLs tend to show the least growth compared to ELLs who are Self-Contained or ICT or General Education. The 2015 NYSESLAT showed a change to that trend. The majority of ELLs that tested out were students with disabilities and several were long-term ELLs. As for the administration of the NYSITELL, we did not have any students that were eligible for testing in the years 2013-2014 and 2014-2015. We did administer the NYSITELL this September (2015) to one student, a new student from Bangladesh, who had attended an English-medium school in his country, and tested Commanding. We continue to monitor that student's academic performance for the duration of the 45-day period. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students are homogeneously divided into two Stand-Alone self-contained programs. The first is for the Entering (Beginning) ENL students, the second is for the Emerging (Low Intermediate) ENL students. Each of the Entering students receives one unit of study in ENL, one unit in Integrated ENL and one uit of study in Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL in a Core Content Area. In addition, each of the Emerging ENL students receive .5 units of study in ENL, along with one unit of study in ENL/ELA and .5 unit of study in Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL in a Core Content Area. For the Integrated ENL, students are grouped per grade level and subject area. A push-in model is observed with an ENL teacher moving to the classes. 2  b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? During the course of one week, the Entering (Beginning) ENL students are required to sit for one unit of study in Stand-Alone ENL, a second unit of study in ENL/ELA and a third unit of study that can be either Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL in a Core Content Area. Similiarly, during the week, the Emerging ELL student is required to sit for .5 unit of study in a Stand-Alone ENL, one unit of study in ENL/ELA and another .5 unit of study that can be either Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL in a Core Content Area. In the Transitioning Program, the student is required to sit for .5 unit of study in ENL/Core Content Area and .5 unit of study that can be either a Stand-Alone ENL or and Integrated ENL in a Core Content Area during a week. Next, the Expanding Proficiency Level requires the student to take one unit of study in ENL/Core Content area each week. Finally, those students who are rated Commanding must continue to receive services for an additional two years. Therefore, these students must receive .5 unit of study per week of Integrted ENL in ELA/Core Contente Area or other approved Former ELL services for two additional years. (The other services include those approved by the NYS Commissioner that monitor and support the student's language development and academic progress.) 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher utilizes the following materials: (1) For World History, a set of materials based on the "Patterns of Interaction" Series, used in our Social Studies Department. It includes (1) (a) a Reading Study Guide in English, (b) a Reading Study Guide in Spanish, (c) a multi-language glossary. (2) The "Access-Building Literacy Through Learning" Series for World History, Science, and ELA. (This includes textbooks, activity books, assessments and overhead transparencies.) (3) For US History, Ann Uhl Chamot's Land, People, Nation that implements the CALLA approach to learning English. (4) Science and Social Studies related units from the Reading A-Z computer program. The ENL teacher was trained in the SIOP model, and learned to incorporte a language focus together with a content focus. (5) The ENL teacher utilizes Educator Resources available through the Division of ELLs in partnership with the American Institute for Research. The units are Common-Core aligned, and intended for the various proficiency levels, and showcase challenging texts in ELA and the other content areas. Content subject areas are given glossaries in each subject area. In addition, dictionaries in each language are available in the various native languages. Computers are housed in the ENL classroom. Students are encouraged to use these computers to research material in all subject areas. Students are permitted to use their native language when researching in the various subject areas. Again this year, one of Edison's initiatives is to increase students' vocabulary. Therefore, students are required to maintain a vocabulary section in their notebooks for all classes. To complement this, word walls are found in all classrooms. Vocabulary is previewed daily before reading the text. Also, many visuals can be found in the ENL classroom. These include maps of Asia, the United States, and the world. In addition, students are encouraged to attend lunch-time tutoring as well as Saturday School enrichment classes. The standards of the Common Core are met through various methods. As with the rest of the school population, the English Language Learners are required to participate in Common Core research projects in which they are obligated to compose an argumentative essay. In addition, students are required to read demandng texts as well as submit rigorous assignments. Some ot the texts that are incorported into the lessosn include: Scholastic Magazine, Making Connections 1, 2, and 3, America: See Historia, Visions, Stories We Brought with Us, Reading Guide in English and Spanish, and Patterns of Interaction. Students also have use of individual iPads while in the ENL classroom or while in an Integrted ELA classroom. Students have met with success through the scaffolding that is provided by the highly qualified ENL teacher. 3  : 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) For SIFE students, their native language is incorporated into the lessons. Books and materials such as writings by Sandra Cisneros are included in the lessons. These materials help to promote literacy in both languages. In addition, a bilingual paraprofessional works with the SIFE students in all content areas. b) The learning environment for ELLs in school less than three years ensures that the materials are relevant. Graphic organizers are used to advance their writing. Curriculum planning immerses students in language activities that incorporate listening, speaking, reading and writing on a daily basis. Academic language is used to help students prepare for Regents exams. Units that include cultural elements are included in the curriculum. Weaker students are assigned buddies to facilitate their learning and increase their self-confidence and comfort level. Computers, dictionaries in native languages, word walls that foster word recognition and reference encyclopedias are accessible in the classroom. Additionally, assessment results are analyzed to determine student strengths and weaknesses in order to design support based areas of need. c) For ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years, more writing, advanced reading, and oral presentation projects to improve speaking skills are integrated into the curriculum. Based on Skedula data, results from previous grades are considered and collaborative groupings are varied to address the diversity of learning styles, cultural backgrounds, and educational experiences. Tutoring during lunch periods and Saturdays is also available and encouraged. Computers, dictionaries in native languages, word walls, and reference encyclopedias are accessible in the classroom. d) The curriculum for Long-Term ELLs provides for the teaching of test-taking, study and organizational skills. A further goal of instruction is to familiarize the students with the formal state assessments that measure progress toward English proficiency. Students are encouraged to attend tutoring during lunch periods and Saturdays. e) Former ELLs who have recently exited the program (in years one to two after testing proficient) are provided with specific testing accommodations for all exams. This inclues classroom tests as well as standardized exams. These students are permitted to take all exams in a separate location. In addition, they are given time and a half for all exams as well as standardized tests. Finally, a program to assist these students is being developed; this class will meet twice per week to offer former ELLs the support that is needed to maintain success in their academic programs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In addition to working closely with the ISS/Life Skills teachers, the ENL teacher uses various materials and strategies to provide access to academic content areas as well as accelerate English language development. This includes a class subscription to Easy English News as well as Scholastic Magazine. The ELL students will be working on a Common Core project. For this project as well as other tasks, graphic organizers are included in the lessons. Rosetta Stone will be utilized this year for the Entering students. Various strategies listed below are also incorported into the lessons. Additional strategies include scaffolding as well as the use of the paraprofessionals to assist students when necessary as well as pairing struggling students with those who are adept in various academic areas. 4  There are some students whose IEP require a paraprofessional to accompany them. These paraprofessionals work closely with the ENL teacher and their assigned student. The ENL teacher is aware of her students and their programs; she is an advocate for their interests. As such, she ensures they are receiving the best possible educational experience. A diverse number of materials and strategies are utilized in the classrooms. For the Integrated classes, these include: * Dictionaries for English Learners * Translated versions of Shakespeare's works * i-Pads to access those versions * Graphic Organizers * Providing sentence stems for writing and speaking * Modeling writing: shared/guided writing with sentence frames to support writing * Analyzing sample texts to provide models for writing * Deconstructing complex sentences to support text comprehension * Think-Pair-Share to reinforce listening/speaking * Homogeneous/heterogeneous grouping * Modeling the seven habits of fluent readers * Vocabulary connections/cognates * Vocabulary word families/parts of speech * Vocabulary morphology (using prefixes and suffixes to determine meaning) * Maintaining vocabulary logs An after-school program providing additional support for the ENL students was initiated. ELL and former ELL students were given this support when preparing for Regents exams. The program included two content area teachers working with the ENL teacher in the room. Results were improved scores on the Global, US History and Government and English Regents Exams. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are programmed for the same ENL classes and general education ELLs, as per their proficiency level. SWDs are expected to complete the CCLS-aligned tasks that general education ELLs also complete. SWDs are supported through various methods: flexible grouping (heterogeneous and homogeneous), assistance from paraprofessionals or general education peers, scaffolding using a variety of graphic organizers, as well as teaching specific skills (ie. citing textual evidence, quoting, paraphrasing, and summarizing) in preparation for completing a research-based task, and differentiation for content (usually text complexity), process (or a variety of graphic organizers) and product as appropriate. When recommended, the ELL-SWD student is enrolled in ICT classes to enhance their learning experience. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs who are also enrolled in the Life Skills program receive individual attention in all academic areas. In addition, a number of the ELL students are enrolled in 15:1 ISS classes in which they are able to receive additional individualized attention. Also, ELLs are encouraged to participate in tutoring sessions that are held after school as well as the Saturday School program. Included in the Saturday School Academic Program are classes that prepare the students for Regents Examinations, notably English, Global and US History and Government. An ENL teacher assists with the tutoring sessions. The ENL instructor continuously collaborates with the content area teachers, explaining the infusion of ENL strategies that can be incorporated into their classrooms. The teachers seek out her strategies when working with the ELL population. In addition, the ENL teacher tutors students during one of the students' lunch periods. 5  9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? One new program that is being implemented is Rosetta Stone program, which will be incorporated in the the curriculum for the students who are at the Entering Level. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At the present time, we are not planning to continue the use of Achieve 3000, as for some students , most notably the Entering students, the work , though scaffolded, was too demanding and this limited their interest in the program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students, including ELLs are encouraged to attend tutoring sessions during their lunch periods as well as during the Saturday School sessions and after-school sessions. Parents are reminded of this unique opportunity via phonemaster messages, direct contact via phone conversations and outreach by the guidance counselors when necessary. In addition, ELLs are encouraged to participate in after school opportunities such as sporting events and clubs in order to enhance their high school experience and provide a well-rounded education for them. Notices are posted throughout the school and announcements are made on a daily basis. Also, parents are encouraged to attend all PTA meetings and they are especially encouraged to participate in the Orientation meeting for incoming students, which is held in late August, before the school year officially begins. At SLT meetings, parents continuously lobby for programs that include parents of ELL students. During the past year, parents of ELLs were invited to a special College Night in which topics such as the college application process, scholarships, etc. were reviewed with the parents. Interpreters for this program were available for this event. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. There are a number of instructional materials used to support ELLs in their classes. The ENL teacher has incorporated the use of a Smart Board in her lessons to directly support the students’ academic achievement. In addition, students have access to iPads while in the Stand-Alone ENL class as well as in the Integrated ENL/ELA classrooms. They are encouraged to use this technology during the lessons. Recently, the ENL program purchased printers so that the students would have the ability to print their research and student work for their content area classes. In addition, the following materials are used to support the content areas: Scholastic Magazines, Making Connections 1, 2, and 3, McDougal Littell World History Glossary (Multi-Lingual Glossary), America: See Historia, Visions, Stories We Brought with Us, Reading Guide in English and Spanish, and Patterns of Interaction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In addition to the above, the English Language Learners have access to glossaries as well as dictionaries in their native languages. The ENL coordinator has reached out to other schools and obtained texts in some of the students' native language. Finally, IPAD's are used in class. Some programs that are included are bilingual dictionaries an app that allows them to locate words in their native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Various resources are incorporated into the ELLs’ school day. Aside from the support given by the ENL teacher as she advocates for her students, the ELL population is subject to a number of resources such as those listed above. These materials are specifically designed to enhance the ELLs’ lexile range as the pre-assessment determines the course of readings that will be presented to the students. In additon, some of the students are assigned a para-professional who assists them with various required tasks in the ENL classroom as well as those in the various content area classes. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? There are a number of instructional materials used to support ELLs in their classes. The ENL teacher has incorporated the use of a Smart Board in her lessons to directly support the students’ academic achievement. In addition, students have access to iPads while in the Stand-Alone ENL class as well as in the Integrated ENL/ELA classrooms. They are encouraged to use this technology during the lessons. Recently, the ENL program purchased printers so that the students would have the ability to print their research and student work for their content area classes. In addition, the following materials are used to support 6  the content areas: Scholastic Magazines, Making Connections 1, 2, and 3, McDougal Littell World History Glossary (Multi-Lingual Glossary), America: See Historia, Visions, Stories We Brought with Us, Reading Guide in English and Spanish, and Patterns of Interaction. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, the ELL students are invited to the school for a special orientation. The students are given a tour of the school and informed of the various academic programs that are available to them. In addition, they become aware of the extra-curicular activities in which the students can participate. Shortly before the start of the school year, the parents and students are again invited to the school to meet the administration of the school. During the meeting, they become aware of the expectations of each department and opportunities that exist for the students in the school. During the first few days in the building, the ENL coordinator welcomes the ELL students to the school. During the course of the school year, she guides the students through the challenges of the school year and helps them to meet success in their classes. Recently, a new ELL student was admitted to the school. The principal interviewed the student and met with her parents. He then gave the three of them a tour of the school and introduced them to some of the new student’s teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Being Edison High School is a Career and Technical Education High School, there is one foreign language taught in the school; this is Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1) Professional development is strongly encouraged for all ELL personnel. The ENL coordinator and Assistant Principal attended professional development sessions for the LAP document. In addition, the ENL teacher has attended ongoing professional development sessions throughout the school year. Also, the ENL Coordinator is kept abreast of all professional development courses that are offered through oell. The ENL teacher will be providing Professional Development to the teachers during Faculty Seminars. These sessions will begin during the late fall and will continue throughout the year. In addition, on November 3 rd , the teachers will attend Professional Learning sessions that will focus on topics such as Differentiated Instruction and Student Engagement. These topics will include the ELL students in the Content Area classes. Professional Learning is encouraged for all ELL personnel in the school. Professional Learning will be planned into the school year. Teachers of ELLs are involved in a session that introduces them to the ELL students and the various challenges they face as they progress through the school year. 7  In addition to formal professional development, the ENL Coordinator meets with the teachers of her ELLs to detemine how they can best implement programs and strategies that will help the ELL students in their content areas. Also, the faculty seminars and department meetings discuss professional topics such as the use of assessments and students' varied learning styles. In addition, two assistant principals attended a professional learning sessions regarding supervising the ENL program. This was sponsored by the Executive Leadership Institute. Finally, the ENL Coordinator is attending a two day workshop entitled "Supporting ELLs with On-Demand Writing for the ELA Regents". The ESL coordinator has attended a number of Professional Development sessions. The Assistant Principal also attended the LAP Training workshop as well as Addressing the Needs of the English Language Learner sponsored by the Executive Leadership Institute. Recently, she attended a session entitled, ELL Compliance Workshop. Finally, the Pupil Personnel Secretary attended a workshop entitled The Identification Process during the prior school year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. There are many programs offered to help the ELL student transition to the high school. These include student participation in orientation, orientation to Edison High School for the parents and students, as well as inviting families to learn more about the ENL Programs. In addition, students are strongly encouraged to participate in tutoring sessions that are held during the lunch periods and a strong Saturday School program. Finally, the guidance counselors will be attending professional development sessions during the school year. Teachers are encouraged to discuss information with the ENL Coodinator regarding the education of ELLs in the content areas. In addition, teachers are kept informed of the most recent developments in the Common Core Standards including the ELA shifts and how they apply to their students including the ELL population. Other topics that are reviewed include points of entry, engaging students in instruction, assessing students’ learning, questioning techniques, and the application of rigor to the classroom. During this professional development, the application of these strategies to the various students, including ELLs are discussed. In addition, the use of Skedula to keep parents and students abreast of their progress, was also reviewed. Hence, helping the teachers to provide additional information to the families of ELLs. Throughout the school year, the ENL Coordinator/teacher will hold sessions during which attendance will be taken. These sessions will discuss the challenges that the ELL students face in the classroom and how to add a language objective to content area lessons as per the SIOP model. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Contact with parents is an ongoing process. Parents are informed of their individual child’s progress through the Progress Reports, which are sent out in their native language, as well as report cards. In addition, the teachers contact the parents or guardians on a need-be basis. Also, parents have daily access to their child's latest grades through Pupil Path. During the school year, time will be set aside for parent contact, in which the parents will be welcomed to the school and encouraged to sit with the teachers to discuss his/her child’s progress. Should interpreters be needed, in-house interpreters will be available for Spanish, Punjabi, Hindu, 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 8  All parents are encouraged to attend monthly PTA meetings at the high school. In additon, they are contacted on a daily basis regarding attendance, cuts, discipline, etc. Additionally, they are invited to attend special workshops to promote their child's education. The School Based Leadership Team discussed the CEP and its support of the ELL community. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Moses Ojeda, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Thomas Edison CTE High School School DBN: 28Q620 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Moses Ojeda Title Principal Patricia Minogue Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Ismene Petroutsos ENL/Bilingual Teacher Shariffa Doman Parent Nancy Lavin Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Kristen Bellomo School Counselor Juan Mendez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/31/15 10/31/15 1/1/01 10/31/15 10/31/15 10/31/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/31/15 10/31/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 28Q620 School Name: Thomas Edison CTE High School Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Petroutsos, Ismene ENL Teacher no Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1. Language preferences of the parent community are attained through ATS. The preferences are listed under the Spoken Language and Written Language columns in the RAPL report. In addition, if students are new to the New York City Public School System, their parents are administered the Home Language Identification Survey. Information is gathered from this document and shared with the school community through the ENL Coordinator, Ms. Petroutsos. When a new student enters the NYCDOE, his /her parent or guardian is asked to complete a Home Langauge Survey. If the survey indicates that the Home Language is other than English, the ENL Coordinator is notified and the process for determining the need for ENL services begins. In addition, the ENL coordinator arranges for school communications to be sent in the preferred language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language 2. Communication in the preferred language has been an ongoing process at this school. Messages via Phone masters are regularly sent home in the parent's' or guardians' preferred languages. It should be noted that there are forty languages according to the 2014-2015 RHLA ATS Report. The predominant parents’ preferred languages include: Spanish, Haitian Creole, Hindi, Punjabi, Chinese, Bengali, Urdu, Filipino, and Arabic. In addition to the RHLA report, the preferred language can also be attained through interviews with parents, the information on the students' Blue Cards as well as parent surveys . 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 1. Parents are sent Progress Reports six times per year. The teachers’ comments are translated into the parents’ preferred language. In addition, letters regarding exams such as the PSAT’s, MOSL Assessment, the NYSESLAT are also distributed to parents in their preferred language. Finally phone master messages are translated Progress Reports Translated phone masters created by in school staff 3 members including bilingual teachers, secretaries and guidance counselors. into the various preferred home languages of the parents. The translated College Handbook for ELLs and their parents is available to students and families in the Guidance/College Offices.The fall Parent-Teacher Conferences are scheduled for November 9h and 10 th . Phone masters will be sent out in the parents' or guardians' preferred languages. Translation services in various languages such as Spanish, Mandarin,and Punjabi will also be available during those conferences. In addition, the parent-facing documents will be disseminated to the individual parents or guardians during individual conferences, scheduled to be held at a time other than the Parent-Teacher Conferences. At this time, the ENL coordinator, Ms. Petroutsos, will meet with the parents or guardians to discuss the child's progress, especially in the area of language. Content area teachers will also meet with the parents or guardians if it is requested. Interpreters will be available for these meetings. Should an in-house interpreter not be available, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be notified at least two weeks in advance of the meetings. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 2. There are a number of meetings with the parents that are held throughout the school year. Parents of incoming students are invited to attend an Orientation session at the beginning of the school year; is was held in late August and translators were available In addition, Parent-Teacher interviews are held twice a year. Again, interpreters will be available for these interviews. Also, teachers participate in parent outreach sessions twice per week. Should the use of an interpreter be required, those services are available. In some cases, the assistance of a paraprofessional or an aide is used to communicate with the parent. In addition to the above, the guidance counselors are in touch with the parents on a need to be basis. Finally, parents are encouraged to contact school personnel should they have a question or concerns. Interpreters are available to translate for the parents or guardians. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 4  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 1. The Language ID Guide is presently on display at the security desk and the main office. In addition, a welcome poster is displayed at the entrance to the school building. Also, the Parents’ Guide to Language Access brochure is available at all times. It is distributed to parents through the Guidance Office and the ENL Coordinator. Finally, hard copies of the Parents’ Bill of Rights are available in the Guidance, College Office and Main Office. These documents are available for the parent at any time Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 1. Parents will be informed of the various services available for their children and themselves. They will be asked to comment on the services after they are rendered.A group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages will be consulted for feedback on best practices regarding communication between home and school. 5 
