 27Q650 School Name: HIGH SCHOOL FOR CONSTRUCTION TRADES, ENGINEERING AND ARCHITECTURE Principal: LAKEISHA GORDON     Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information LakeishaGordon 342700011650 9-12 School Number (DBN): 27Q650 9406 104th Street Ozone Park, NY 11416 (718) 846-6280 Phone Number: (718) 846-6283 Fax: Kimberly Seaton KSeaton@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 27 Email Address: LakeishaGordon Monique Lee VictoriaSepulveda Matthew Dimella N/A AbigailFarias MarissaCampiz N/A District Information Juan Mendez Superintendent: 30-48 Linden Place Flushing, NY 11354 Room 510 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 281-7696 Phone Number: 27-Queens FSC: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Marlene Wilks Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 82-01 Rockaway Blvd MWilks@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (347) 203-9578 Phone Number: (718) 642-5705 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lakeisha Gordon Monique Pearson Victoria Sepulveda NA NA Abigail Farias MarissaCampiz NA MatthewDimella Ed Hawkins FloreCadet *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Brian Ciampo Brad Shenkman Gilbert Callan Elizabeth Semungal Mike Torres Angelo Mendel Martina Hernandez Indra Puran Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The following is The High School for Construction Trades, Engineering, and Architecture’s Mission and Core Values. Mission Statement: Our school is committed to providing young men and women of diverse cultural, ethnic, and socio-economic backgrounds with a sense of belonging. This is conducted in an educational environment that allows them to explore their talents and interests while receiving a solid academic foundation that prepares them for post-secondary education, as well as careers in Construction Trades, Engineering and Architecture. The learning 0  environment is specifically designed to promote academic achievement through the integration of the students' career interests while making connections of that learning to the world in which we live. CORE VALUES: A community is based on the combined character and values of its individual members. Every member of the community has the right to expect a safe, clean and supportive environment. We expect students to treat everyone with respect, to withhold judgment until a situation has been viewed from all sides, and to seek help when provoked. Everyone must cooperate to fulfill this expectation. In order to achieve this goal, each student in our school should make a continuous and determined commitment toward exemplifying the following characteristics and values: Respect, Responsibility, Enthusiasm, Hard Work, Integrity and Resilience. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. It can be argued that the heart and hub of the school is our Career and Technical Education (CTE) Program. This is, after all, why our school was created in the first place. Students apply to The High School for Construction Trades, Engineering, and Architecture (HSCTEA) to be in one of our three career theme academies where, as freshmen, they are introduced to the basics of architecture, construction and engineering. Over time they explore these fields in more depth while developing sophisticated skills through a series of hands-on project-based experiences. In their Engineering course , students wire electronic circuits that perform logical quests, linking this to similar topics of logic in math. In Construction, students work with hand and power tools to create, design and construct practicum areas and install electrical circuitry. In Architecture, students have spent months in “architecture boot camp,” focusing on developing hand-drafting and model-making skills, learning how scale plays a significant role in developing and representing creative architectural ideas. A superlative example of this is the large periodic table displayed in the main lobby of our school, a collaborative project between the students’ architecture and chemistry classes. What is even more remarkable is the fact that the infrastructure of our school was not designed to accommodate construction or engineering, as we were originally intended to be the School of Architecture and Urban Planning . Thus, to the credit of our teachers, students are learning their career skills in converted computer, art, and music rooms. Students taking Engineering Design and Development, for instance, work in groups to design solutions to problems of their own choosing that are interdisciplinary and build on prior knowledge from all academic content areas. The research and documentation portions of the projects are very focused on literacy and expository writing while the hands-on development of solutions focuses on teamwork, problem solving, decision making, and quantitative skills. But there is, perhaps, no greater measure of success than knowing that our students are continuing in their career pathways after graduation as carpenters, electricians, laborers, steamfitters, and painters, as well as continuing their education in post-secondary colleges and institutions, such as Cornell University, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NYU Polytech, Syracuse, and City Colleges of Engineering and Architecture and work-based learning opportunities. 1  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We our proud of our inclusive school that includes Students with Disabilities and ENL students. These students have unique academic and social/emotional needs. They need entry points to access our rigorous curriculum, including our AP classes and differentiation of classroom instruction. Some need support from guidance counselors, related service providers and/or one-on-one mentors. In addition, frequent school-home communication is key for our special needs students. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. What our school does well: ● School leaders and faculty have aligned curricula to NYS Learning Standards integrating Common Core Learning tasks across grade and subject areas with a clear emphasis on higher order thinking skills and academic rigor addressing the needs of subgroups. ● School leaders regularly gather and analyze summative, periodic, and classroom level assessment data to determine areas of strengths and needs in order to track progress and influence school practices. ● School leaders and faculty developed and use tools to identify student mastery and performance trends greatly impacting curricular and organizational decisions. ● School leaders and faculty use Periodic Assessment and student artifacts to track progress and adjust school wide and classroom level plans and goals of student subgroups. ● Assessments and grading practices are regularly evaluated and adjusted with a focus on building alignment and coherence leading to an effective expectation of the Common Core Learning Standards. ● Annual planning processes are strategically aligned to measure progress for long and short terms goals which is collectively shared and valued by teams of teachers and individual teachers to improve instruction. What our school needs to improve/areas of improvement: ● STUDENT GOALS AND NEXT STEPS TO ACHIEVE MASTERY: Teacher teams and individual teachers’ assessments and rubrics identify students’ strengths and areas of needs; however individual students do not always receive actionable feedback from their teachers and teachers are not given actionable feedback and therefore are not always clear of their next learning steps to achieve mastery. ● SOCIAL EMOTIONAL GROWTH: In order to achieve a highly inclusive culture, social-emotional learning goals and youth development needs should be fully supported by the school faculty. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 27Q650 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1027 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 9 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 59.0% % Attendance Rate 52.8% % Reduced Lunch 2.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.2% 34.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 12.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.53 3% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 97% 93% 97.8% 53.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES N/A YES No N/A 151 126 42 93.1% 6.2% 15.5% 9.9% 31.4% 12.1% 6 14% 6.6 N/A N/A 95% 96% 94.8% 47% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A NO N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The 2017/2018 School Quality Guide indicates that ___of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes feel challenged. 2. The 2017/2018 School Quality Snapshot indicates that only _____of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, they are challenged. As a school community, we would like to see our students are engaged in a curriculum that is challenging and therefore will better prepare them to succeed in their post-secondary academic careers and allow them more opportunities to receive diplomas with greater academic distinction. Our goal is to increase the number of Advanced Placement and College now courses that we offer. It is also our goal to increase the rigor in all classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all Core Content Teachers will develop and/or revise four rigorous CCLS and NYS aligned units of student culminating in Literacy interdisciplinary Performance Based Assessment Tasks (PBAT) as measured by 65% of students indicating in the 2018-2019 School Quality Snapshot, that they agree or strongly agree that in most or all of their classes, they are challenged. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department Lead Team Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Common Planning with Content Teachers ● Grade team to ensure that standards are aligned and that there is vertical and horizontal planning to ensure that we are continuously challenging our students as they progress in their academic career ● Developing common Reading and Writing Strategies for Students ● Use Common Planning Time and the Grade/Content Teams to develop standards based differentiated unit plans, lesson plans, and strategies for each subject based on the data from the interim assessments and the Common Core Standards. ● Teacher Lead will provide targeted professional development opportunities based on the needs of the students and teachers as demonstrated on assessments and observations reports. ● Administrative Team and instructional coaches will conduct classroom walk-throughs, inter-visitations and/or observations with feedback to teachers to determine the effectiveness of strategies introduced. ● Students with Disabilities will have a case manager who assists with their learning and checks on their progress in their core academic classes on a regular basis. All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department Lead Team ● The case manager will also be charged with writing and facilitating their IEP meeting. ● Students with Disabilities will identify their learning goals through the help of their case manager and with their Special Education teacher and/or case manager to discuss their progress towards these goals. ● Students with Disabilities will be recommended for targeted tutoring. 5  ● Students with Disabilities and their parents will be provided with IEP progress reports that will help to ensure effective communication between teachers and parents/guardians. ● Use grade team to encourage students to attend tutoring and to continue to develop and discuss differentiated strategies to support students. ● Use spreadsheets to monitor testing accommodations, credit accumulation, and related services after each semester and monitored by the students' case manager. ● Schedule professional development for teachers to assist in differentiating instruction, implementing Specially Designed instruction and using students' IEP when grading, ● We will continue to implement our common grading policy and expectations across the classes. ● Weekly team meetings discuss students who are falling behind, curriculum development and planning. ● Administrator in charge of Special Education monitors grades, progress reports, scholarship and assessment data to recommend intervention. ● Parent Workshops: How to be a partner in your child's education All Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator ● Understanding your students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP) ● Parent Focus Brunch ● New York City Department of Education Common Core Library for Parents ● Create a calendar of common planning time meetings for all teachers. All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 ● Weekly Professional Development or Common Planning Time ● Use Common Planning Time and the Grade Team to develop standards based unit plans, lesson plans, and strategies for each subject based on the data from the interim assessments and the Common Core Standards. This is also time to share best instructional strategies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administrative Team and Teacher Department Lead Team 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator, Kimberly Seaton will coordinate Parent Teach Conferences, Parent Night, Monthly Parent Workshops, Phone Masters, Parent E-mails, Case Conferences with parents of students that need additional support, Student Teacher Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association, Financial Aid Conferences for Parents, College Workshops and Parent Newsletter. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Baseline Assessments, Interim Assessments, Final Assessments, Observation Reports, Lesson and Unit Plans, Regents Data, Advanced Placement Scores, Progress Reports, Collaborative Team teachers, and Department Leads  TL-Common planning time for all teachers within each grade team that occur on a weekly basis throughout the year.  TL-Inquiry Team  TL-Data Specialist  TL Fair Student Funding HS-Teacher Per Session  TL Fair Student Funding HS-Funding to support registration and travel to attend professional development conferences.  TL Fair Student Funding HS and VTEA-Instructional materials and resources for hands-on projects.  TL Fair Student Funding HS-Funds to support student field trips (e.g. transportation, entry fees). VTEA, TL Fair Student Funding, HS Contract For Excellence HS allocation Compensatory time for teachers in the role of Grade Team Leaders. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, all Core Content Teachers will develop and/or revise two rigorous CCLS and NYS aligned units of student culminating in Literacy interdisciplinary Performance Based Assessment Tasks (PBAT) as measured by 60% of students indicating in a January 2019 school-wide survey, that they agree or strongly agree that in most or all of their classes, they are challenged. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Interim Assessments, Final Assessments, Regent Exams, Advanced Placement Exams, School-wide survey results Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. According to the 2017/2018 School Survey, ____ percent of students agreed or strongly agreed that they are learning a lot in their classes at their school to prepare them for the next level or grade. The continued work that teachers are doing to ensure that there is vertical and horizontal alignment of curriculum has strengthened our ability to prepare students for the next grade level. 2. CTEA is a screened school with three rigorous Career and Technical Education majors. Students with special needs are increasingly representing a larger part of the school’s total population of 1050 students. In fact, for the first time in our school’s history, we have four or five sections of students with IEPs in grades 9-11. We are incredibly proud of our academically diverse learning community; however, it is challenging to ensure that we are meeting the academic needs of all students. It is our goal to ensure that all students including students with special needs are supported to ensure that they are passing their courses, have access to a rigorous curriculum including AP classes, and have the tools and skills needed to succeed in their post-secondary career. Furthermore, it is our goal to ensure that all students are continually challenged and engaged. According to the School Survey: 60% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers help them catch up if they are behind. 57% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers notice if they have trouble learning something. 63% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers give them specific suggestions about how they can improve their work in class. 62% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers explain things a different way if they don’t understand something in class. 50% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset. ` November 7, 2017: We realize that as a school we have to improve dramatically in the above areas. On November 7, 2017, we will have a professional development workshop analyzing these results to ensure that all adults are aware of our areas in which improvements are necessary. We will also develop next steps. By January 29, 2018: We will administer a survey to determine if are strategies our improving in these five areas. We will develop additional strategies if needed to continue to support our students. 9  By June 1, 2018: We will administer a final survey and analyze the results on Chancellor's Professional Day in June to determine the final impact. Based on our results, we will use the data to develop new structures and supports for the upcoming school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, CTEA teachers will implement differentiation strategies in their lesson plans to support, engage and challenge all students, as evidenced by a 10% increase in the number of teachers achieving effective and highly effective in 3C of ADVANCE observations. 0 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department Lead Team Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Common Planning with Content Teachers ● Grade team to ensure that standards are aligned and that there is vertical and horizontal planning to ensure that we are continuously challenging our students as they progress in their academic career ● Developing common Reading and Writing Strategies for Students ● Use Common Planning Time and the Grade Team to develop standards based differentiated unit plans, lesson plans, and strategies for each subject based on the data from the interim assessments and the Common Core Standards. ● Teacher Lead will provide targeted professional development opportunities based on the needs of the students and teachers as demonstrated on assessments and observations reports. ● Administrative Team and instructional coaches will conduct classroom walkthroughs, inter-visitations and/or observations with feedback to teachers to determine the effectiveness of strategies introduced. ● Students with Disabilities will have a case manager who assists with their learning and checks on their progress in their core academic classes on a regular basis. All Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department Lead Team ● The case manager will also be charged with writing and facilitating their IEP meeting. ● Students with Disabilities will identify their learning goals through the help of their Special Education Teacher and/or case manager, and will meet weekly to discuss their progress towards these goals. ● Students with Disabilities will be recommended for targeted tutoring. 1  ● Students with Disabilities and their parents will be provided with IEP progress reports that will help to ensure effective communication between teachers and parents/guardians. ● Use grade team to encourage students to attend tutoring and to continue to develop and discuss differentiated strategies to support students. ● Use spreadsheets to monitor testing accommodations, credit accumulation, and related services after each semester and monitored by the students' case manager. ● Schedule professional development for teachers to assist in differentiating instruction, implementing Specially Designed Instruction and using the IEP when grading Students with Disabilities. ● We will continue to implement our common grading policy and expectations across the classes. ● Weekly team meetings discuss students who are falling behind, curriculum development and planning. ● Administrator in charge of Special Education monitors grades, progress reports, scholarship and assessment data to recommend intervention. ● Parent Workshops: How to be a partner in your child's education ● Understanding your students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP) ● Parent Focus Brunch ● New York City Department of Education Common Core Library for Parents ● Analyze Baseline Assessment Results and student work to identify the gaps between what students currently know and are able to do and the demands of the Common Core. Understanding the gaps between the two will help our teachers determine what our students need to learn and inform their decisions about what to teach in response. ● Develop an Action Plan. The action plan will contain detailed steps, components and goals for our teachers to complete after each baseline/interim assessment. ● Teachers will work with their grade teams to develop a Literacy interdisciplinary Performance Based Assessment Task (PBAT) that is aligned to the Common Core Standards. The performance Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinators All Parents of Students with Special Needs All Students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department Lead Team 2  based writing task will require our students to use evidence to thoroughly explain and support claims in writing ● Teachers will develop common rubrics, and formative assessments (student work, exit slips, parking lots) to frequently assess their students’ mastery of the Common Core Literacy Skill(s). Formative assessment slips will be differentiated based on the evaluation of our baseline and sub-group data. For example, teachers will begin to make more intentional moves to include Universal Design for Learning assessments inclusive of level 3 and 4 Depth of Knowledge Assessments. Task will also intentionally be created for our growing Special Education population of students. ● Design differentiated tasks for higher performing and lower performing groups ● Conduct inter-visitations and provide feedback on low inference observations using the Danielson framework to strengthen school-wide coherence. For example, since we are implementing component 3.B. Using questioning and Discussion techniques, questioning/discussion will be one of our lens used as a tool to create a common language across departments and grade levels. ● Collect and examine student work and assessments to determine students’ mastery of the literacy skill(s) using an agreed upon protocol. Students’ work will be evaluated through a protocol inclusive of Depth of Knowledge to ensure that all tasks are intentionally aligned to all student data. For example, our high performing students will continue to be challenged by tasks created from level 3 and 4. At the same time, students who are struggling with skill(s) or concept(s) might continue to complete tasks from level 1 or 2. At the end, we want all students completing level 3 and 4 tasks. ● Revise CTEA 2017/2018 professional development plans based on teacher need. In addition to teacher need, the plan will continue to be revised based on student data and data collected through our informal and formal observation using the Danielson framework. ● Analyze Interim and Formative Assessments to determine if the students have mastered the Common Core math/literacy skills. If the data reveals low performance in any specific standard, the teacher will collaborate with their common planning team and implement a new instructional strategy or resources to teach the skill. ● Target students for mandatory tutoring if the data indicates that they have yet to master the Common Core math/literacy. 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator, Kimberly Seaton will coordinate Monthly Parent Workshops, Parent Teacher Association, Parent newsletter, College Workshops for Parents, Parent Coordinator, and Guidance Counselors Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Resources for Children with Special Needs, Inc.  UFT  Parent Workshops with appropriate training  TL Fair Student Funding HS, Contract For Excellence HS allocation. Common planning time for all teachers within each grade team that occur on a weekly basis throughout the year.  TL Fair Student Funding HS, Contract For Excellence HS allocation. Per session for after-school instructional planning and professional development.  TL Fair Student Funding HS-Funding to support registration and travel to attend professional development conferences.  TL Fair Student Funding HS and VTEA-Instructional materials and resources for hands-on projects.  TL Fair Student Funding HS-Funds to support student field trips (e.g. transportation, entry fees). VTEA, TL Fair Student Funding, HS Contract For Excellence HS allocation Compensatory time for teachers in the role of Grade Team Leaders and Department Team Leaders. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, CTEA teachers will implement differentiation strategies in their lesson plans to support, engage and challenge all students, as evidenced by a 5% increase in the number of teachers achieving effective and highly effective in 3C of ADVANCE observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Interim Assessments, Final Assessments, Mock Exams, Regent Exams, ADVANCE data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our 2017/2018 School Quality guide indicates that the vast majority of our teachers have collaborated with other teachers to develop and/or revise units of study that are aligned to the Common Core standards, develop and implement common literacy strategies/techniques and common rubrics. Collaboration is done during Common Planning Time, Department Time, and Parent Outreach Time. Additionally, every Monday is devoted to teacher professional development or planning. It is our goal to continue to strengthen our teacher planning teams and therefore increase our impact on student achievement. According to the School Quality Guide: 93% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that in planning their last instructional unit, they had the resources and tools they needed to include multiple opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational. 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that in planning their last instructional unit, they had the resources and tools they needed to include multiple opportunities for students to interact with complex grade-level text. 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that in planning their last instructional unit, they had the resources and tools they needed to include multiple opportunities for students to interact with academic language. 2. Although our teachers clearly have ample time to plan instruction and are collaborative, according to the 2017/2018 School Quality guide, we are not seeing the impact on student achievement. 2017/2018 School Quality Guide: 77% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their classes at their school really make them think critically. 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that in planning their last instructional unit, they had the resources and tools they needed to include multiple opportunities for students to interact with academic language. 6  2. Although our teachers clearly have ample time to plan instruction and are collaborative, according to the 2016/2017 School Quality guide, we are not seeing the impact on student achievement. 2016/2017 School Quality Guide: 77% of students agreed or strongly agreed that their classes at their school really make them think critically. We realized that as a school we have to improve dramatically so that feedback from students and teachers is more aligned. On November 6, 2018, we will have a professional development workshop analyzing these results to ensure that all adults are aware of our areas in need of of improvement. We will also develop next steps. By January 29, 2019 We will administer a survey to determine if our strategies are making a positive impact. We will develop additional strategies if needed to continue to support our students. By June 1, 2019 We will administer a final survey and analyze the results on Chancellor's Professional Day in June to determine the final impact. Based on our results, we will use the data to development new structures and supports for the upcoming school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all school inquiry teams will collaboratively analyze student work and interim assessment results to improve student achievement in the skill/standard identified as measured by a 10% increase in student achievement in the identified standard/skill. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Common Planning with Content Teachers All Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 ● Grade team to ensure that standards are aligned and that there is vertical and horizontal planning to ensure that we are continuously challenging our students as they progress in their academic career ● Developing common Reading and Writing Strategies for Students ● Use Common Planning Time and the Grade Team to develop standards based differentiated unit plans, lesson plans, and strategies for each subject based on the data from the interim assessments and the Common Core Standards. ● Teacher Lead will provide targeted professional development opportunities based on the needs of the students and teachers as demonstrated on assessments and observations reports. ● Administrative Team and instructional coaches will conduct classroom walkthroughs, inter-visitations and/or observations with feedback to teachers to determine the effectiveness of strategies introduced. Administrative Team and Teacher Department and Grade Lead Team. Students with Disabilities will have a case manager who assists with their learning and checks on their progress in their core academic classes on a regular basis. ● Students with Disabilities will have a case manager who assists with their learning and checks on their progress in their core academic classes on a regular basis. All Teachers September 2018-Ongoing Administrative Team and Teacher Department and Grade Lead Team ● The case manager will also be charged with writing and facilitating their IEP meeting. ● Students with Disabilities will identify their learning goals through the help of their Special Education Teacher and/or case manager, and will meet weekly to discuss their progress towards these goals. ● Students with Disabilities will be recommended for targeted tutoring. 8  ● Students with Disabilities and their parents will be provided with IEP progress reports that will help to ensure effective communication between teachers and parents/guardians. ● Use grade team to encourage students to attend tutoring and to continue to develop and discuss differentiated strategies to support students. ● Use spreadsheets to monitor testing accommodations, credit accumulation, and related services after each semester and monitored by the students' case manager. ● Schedule professional development for teachers to assist in differentiating instruction, implementing Specially Designed Instruction and using the IEP when grading Students with Disabilities. ● We will continue to implement our common grading policy and expectations across the classes. ● Weekly team meetings discuss students who are falling behind, curriculum development and planning. ● Administrator in charge of Special Education monitors grades, progress reports, scholarship and assessment data to recommend intervention. ● Parent Workshops: How to be a partner in your child's education All Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator ● Understanding your students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP) ● Parent Focus Brunch ● New York City Department of Education Common Core Library for Parents ● Analyze Baseline Assessment Results and student work to identify the gaps between what students currently know and are able to do and the demands of the Common Core. Understanding the gaps between the two will help our teachers determine what our students need to learn and inform their decisions about what to teach in response. ● Develop an Action Plan. The action plan will contain detailed steps, components and goals for our teachers to complete after each baseline/interim assessment. ● Teachers will work with their grade teams to develop a Literacy interdisciplinary Performance Based Assessment Task (PBAT) that is aligned to the Common Core Standards. The performance All Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department and Grade Lead Team 9  based writing task will require our students to use evidence to thoroughly explain and support claims in writing ● Teachers will develop common rubrics, and formative assessments (student work, exit slips, parking lots) to frequently assess their students’ mastery of the Common Core Literacy Skill(s). Formative assessment slips will be differentiated based on the evaluation of our baseline and sub-group data. For example, teachers will begin to make more intentional moves to include Universal Design for Learning assessments inclusive of level 3 and 4 Depth of Knowledge Assessments. Task will also intentionally be created for our growing Special Education population of students. ● Design differentiated tasks for higher performing and lower performing groups ● Conduct inter-visitations and provide feedback on low inference observations using the Danielson framework to strengthen school-wide coherence. For example, since we are implementing component 3.B. Using Questioning and Discussion techniques, questioning/discussion will be one of our lens used as a tool to create a common language across departments and grade levels. ● Collect and examine student work and assessments to determine students’ mastery of the literacy skill(s) using an agreed upon protocol. Students’ work will be evaluated through a protocol inclusive of Depth of Knowledge to ensure that all tasks are intentionally aligned to all student data. For example, our high performing students will continue to be challenged by tasks created from level 3 and 4. At the same time, students who are struggling with skill(s) or concept(s) might continue to complete tasks from level 1 or 2. At the end, we want all students completing level 3 and 4 tasks. ● Revise CTEA 2017/2018 professional development plans based on teacher need. In addition to teacher need the plan will continue to be revised based on student data and data collected through our informal and formal observation using the Danielson framework. ● Analyze Interim and Formative Assessments to determine if the students have mastered the Common Core math/literacy. If the data reveals low performance in any specific standard, the teacher will collaborate with their common planning team and implement a new instructional strategy or resources to teach the skill. ● Target students for mandatory tutoring if the data indicates that they have yet to master the Common Core math/literacy skills. 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Workshops, Parent Teacher Association, Parent newsletter, College Workshops for Parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Department Meetings, Common Planning Time, Targeted Professional Development, and Department Leads  TL Fair Student Funding HS, Contract For Excellence HS allocation. Common planning time for all teachers within each grade team that occur on a weekly basis throughout the year.  TL Fair Student Funding HS, Contract For Excellence HS allocation. Per session for after-school instructional planning and professional development.  TL Fair Student Funding HS-Funding to support registration and travel to attend professional development conferences.  TL Fair Student Funding HS and VTEA-Instructional materials and resources for hands-on projects.  TL Fair Student Funding HS-Funds to support student field trips (e.g. transportation, entry fees). VTEA, TL Fair Student Funding, HS Contract For Excellence HS allocation Compensatory time for teachers in the role of Grade Team Leaders and Department Team Leaders. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, all school inquiry teams will collaboratively analyze student work and interim assessment results to improve student achievement in the skill/standard identified as measured by a 5% increase in student achievement in the identified standard/skill. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Interim Assessments, Final Assessments, Mock Exams, Regent Exams, and Advanced Placement Exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the 2017/2018 School Quality Guide, _____of students agreed or strongly agreed that their teachers treat them with respect. As a school community we strive to maintain a culture where teachers are reflective and communicate with adults and students with a respectful tone. We utilize a restorative approach for resolving student conflicts and this method also ensures that student voices are heard. Additionally, our student government frequently meets with the administrative team to ensure that they have ability to discuss any student concerns. 2. This year we developed more opportunities that provide our students with the support needed to succeed academically, socially, and emotionally. Each grade level has a Parent Outreach Team, where our teachers conduct student case-conferencing, develop interventions to support students, as well as create opportunities to celebrate our students that are improving or succeeding academically. These relationships will ensure that our students receive ample social-emotional support that may result in improved academic performance. Our 2018/2019 School Quality Guide indicates that only ______of students agreed or strongly agreed that there is at least one adult in the school that they can confide in. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By September 2018, school leaders will develop a collaborative and systematic approach to supporting the social/emotional needs of all students, via Guidance, Parent Outreach and Intervention Teams as measured by at least 80 percent of students agreed or strongly agreed in the 2018-2019 School Quality Guide that there is at least one adult in the school that they can confide in. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Every student is assigned to a Parent Outreach team All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department and Grade Lead Team ● Our guidance counselor are assigned to one of the three career majors at our school (Construction Trades, Engineering, or Architecture)> Students works with the counselor specific to their major. ● Case conferencing for students that need additional social-emotional or academic support. ● Various clubs to encourage that their is teacher-student involvement after school hours. ● Parent Outreach Team per grade ● Guidance counselor for each career major All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department and Grade Lead Team Parent Coordinator ● Parent Workshops: How to be a partner in your child's education All Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 ● Understanding your students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP) ● Parent Focus Brunch ● New York City Department of Education Common Core Library for Parents ● Continuous review of student referrals and suspensions All teachers ● Weekly meeting with Guidance Counselor ● Weekly meeting with Parent Outreach Coordinators ● Continuous updating and monitoring of Intervention spreadsheet One-on-one mentoring system for significantly struggling students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department and Grade Lead Team 3  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Parent Workshops, Parent Teacher Association, Parent newsletter, College Workshops for Parents Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Department Meetings, Common Planning Time, Targeted Professional Development, and Department Leads  TL Fair Student Funding HS, Contract For Excellence HS allocation. Common planning time for all teachers within each grade team that occur on a weekly basis throughout the year.  TL Fair Student Funding HS, Contract For Excellence HS allocation. Per session for after-school instructional planning and professional development.  TL Fair Student Funding HS-Funding to support registration and travel to attend professional development conferences.  TL Fair Student Funding HS and VTEA-Instructional materials and resources for hands-on projects.  TL Fair Student Funding HS-Funds to support student field trips (e.g. transportation, entry fees). VTEA, TL Fair Student Funding, HS Contract For Excellence HS allocation Compensatory time for teachers in the role of Grade Team Leaders and Department Team Leaders. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019, school leaders will develop a collaborative and systematic approach to supporting the social/emotional needs of all students, via Guidance, Parent Outreach and Intervention Teams as measured by at least 75% percent of students agreed or strongly agreed in a school-wide survey that there is at least one adult in the school that they can confide in. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Interim Assessments, Final Assessments, Mock Exams, Regent Exams, intervention team data and school-wide survey results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The 2017/2018 School Quality Snapshot indicates that 94 % of our parents are satisfied with the education that their child is receiving. 2. The 2017/2018 School Quality Snapshot indicates that only 80 % of of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn. It is our goal to improve in this area and make it a goal to partner with parents in our efforts to raise student achievement and college and career readiness rates. We are currently utilizing the extra time that has been built into our schedules for parent outreach to address the College and Career Readiness as well as the importance of the Common Core Learning Standards with parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership plan with families as measured by at least 82 percent of parents indicating that they agree or strongly agree that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn on the 2017/2018 School Quality Snapshot. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● PARENTING : Help all families establish home environments to support children as students. All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department and Grade Lead Team ● COMMUNICATING : Design effective forms of school-to-home and home-to-school communications about school programs and children's' progress. o Conferences with every parent at least once a year. o Language translators to assist families as needed. o Regular schedule of useful notices, memos, phone calls, e-mails, newsletters, and other communications. ● VOLUNTEERING : Recruit and organize parent help and support. o Parent room or family center for volunteer work, meetings, and resources for families. ● LEARNING AT HOME : Provide information and ideas to families about how to help students at home with homework and other curriculum-related activities, decisions, and planning. ● DECISION MAKING : Include parents in school decisions, developing parent leaders and representatives. o Active PTA/PTO or other parent organizations, advisory councils, or committees for parent leadership and participation. ● Parent Workshops ● IEP Meetings ● 504 Meetings ● Guidance Conferences All Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator 6  ● Create and make accessible a list of resources for types of family/parent workshops. All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department and Grade Lead Team ● Identify desired topics through parent survey for parent workshops. ● Increase accuracy and timeliness of posing student grades on Skedula. ● Utilize allocated parent contractual contact time. ● Increase interactions and sharing of best practices between parent organizations at different schools. ● Enhance an online forum where parents and students can have questions answered by each other as well as by administration. ● Parent Survey ● Parent Focus Group ● Conferences with Staff and Faculty ● Parent Workshops ● Open Door Policy 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team and Teacher Department and Grade Lead Team If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Boys and Girls Club Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Partnerships with Community Based Organizations, Parent Coordinator, PTA, SLT Team Fundraising from PTA Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 31, 2019 the school will develop a more collaborative partnership plan with families as measured by at least 80 percent of parents indicating that they agree or strongly agree that school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn on a a school-family survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Administered Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group Instruction Before and After School, and during lunch Small Group Instruction Before and After School, and during lunch Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher referrals, data analysis, and student grades. Mathematics Teacher referrals, data analysis, and student grades. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Before school and after school tutoring, and during lunch. Small group differentiated instruction based on Baseline and Interim Assessment Results. The activities are targeted based on the skills each student needs to work on. Teachers also case conference in their weekly grade team meetings to support students who are at risk. Teachers develop action plans for students who have failed their class. Before school and after school tutoring, and during lunch. Small group differentiated instruction based on Baseline and Interim Assessment Results. The activities are targeted based on the skills each student needs to work on. Teachers also case conference in their weekly grade 9  Science Teacher referrals, data analysis, and student grades. Social Studies Teacher referrals, data analysis, and student grades. team meetings to support students who are at risk. Teachers developaction plans for students who havefailed their class. Before school and after school tutoring, and during lunch. Small group differentiated instruction based on Baseline and Interim Assessment Results. The activities are targeted based on the skills each student needs to work on. Teachers also case conference in their weekly grade team meetings to support students who are at risk. Teachers develop action plans for students who have failed their class. Before school and after school tutoring, and during lunch. Small group differentiated instruction based on Baseline and Interim Assessment Results. The activities are targeted based on the skills each student needs to work on. Teachers also case conference in their weekly grade team meetings to support students who are at risk. Teachers develop action plans Small Group Instruction Before and After School, and during lunch Before and After School, and during lunch 0 Small Group Instruction Before and After School, and during lunch At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher referrals, data analysis, and student grades. forstudents who havefailed their class. Counseling Services i.e. peer relations, adult relations, self control, coping skills, decision-making, self evaluation, mediation, etc. Guidance counselors also case conferences in their weekly grade team meetings to support students who are at risk. Savitri Hiralall provides mandated Counseling Services i.e. peer relations, adult relations, self control, coping skills, decision-making, self evaluation, mediation, etc. She also sees students who are at risk. 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 7 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2 Clothing, supplies, Professional Development for parents, Technology, Tutoring, Counseling Services if needed 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 692 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 5  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. HS for Construction Trades, Engineering and Architecture, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students HS for Construction Trades, Engineering and Architecture will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 7  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association). This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Snap Shot of Quality Schools, Quality Review Report , ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 8  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand HS for Construction Trades, Engineering and Architecture School-Parent Compact (SPC) in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 9  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 0  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 1  III. Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 27 School Name The High School for Construction Trades Borough Queens School Number 650 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lakeisha Gordon Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jason Salamanca Teacher/Subject Area Meisi Lau Teacher/Subject Area Christina Auriemma Related-Service Provider Ella Matayeva Superintendent Elaine Lindsey Assistant Principal Rivky Broyde Coach type here School Counselor Vera Nigai Parent Becky Sepulveda Parent Coordinator Kimberly Seaton Field Support Center Staff Member Jennifer Dull Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1054 3 Total number of ELLs 35 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.32%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 16 16 10 10 7 7 2 2 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 35 35 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All students are given a Baseline, Interim, and Final assessments to determine their academic level in all content areas. We also use the scholarship report. The data that we receive helps us design our instructional program and the interventions that we implement for our ELL students. Additionally, students are scheduled for a 180 minutes of ENL instruction at the end of their day in addition to the core classes including English and Creative Writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers have Common Planning time and Department Team time, to develop the assessments and analyze the results. In addition, we have two Data Specialists that are available to support the teachers in both creating assessments and with data analysis. We also provide differentiated Professional Development to teachers that need support with designing and utilizing formative assessments. 4  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use a DYO baseline assessment in September and a DYO Final Assessment at the end of each semester. We also design DYO interim assessments which are administered mid-semester. For summative assessments we also use the NYSESLAT, Regent Exams, and Advanced Placement Exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers collaboratively create action plans based on the data gathered. In the action plan they analyze why the student made the errors that they made and what they can do pedagogically to address the gaps in understanding. The teachers then make modifications to lesson and unit plans to address the student areas of need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our data specialists creates a data spreadsheet that allows our teachers and faculty to easily analyze the results of the NYSELAT and Regents' results. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In June and at the beginning of the school year, teachers and analyze the results. A Baseline Assessment is created and teachers use that data to address any deficiniences that students may have. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Teachers utilize differentiated instructional strategies to support students’ language needs. There is a strong ongoing emphasis on interdisciplinary instruction that focuses on language-across-the-curriculum. Clubs, such as the TAP, Music, and Art, provide a more relaxing forum in which students can work on a host of language skills, such as creative writing, speaking, presentation, and listening skills. Additionally, developing language skills is the primary focus and involves all teachers in the school. CTEA implements a Freestanding English as a Second Language (ESL) Program to students who require support services in second language acquisition. The school provides ESL services via the push-in /collaborative teaching model with an ESL certified teacher to support students in specific content areas. The primary goal of both programs is to assist students in achieving English Language proficiency within three years.• To amplify the literacy and academic skills of ELLs who participate.• To incorporate recognized and researched based ESL instructional strategies across content subject areas.• To give students the skills to perform at city and state grade level in all subject areas. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 5  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students in our school are classified as "Expanding" and are scheduled for 180 weekly minutes of ENL instruction in addition to 225 weekly minutes of ELA and 180 of Creative Writing. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Every content are is considered a language teacher as part of our school-wide effort to develop literacy accroos the curriculum. • Content area teachers monitor the understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms to clarify meaning.• 100% English and content area instruction with Native Language support via Native Language dictionaries, glossaries, and assessments. • Multiple modalities for all students. • Differentiated instruction for all students based on the results of formative and summative assessments. • Math teachers devote extra class time to untangling difficult word problems, and require students to make verbal explanations of the problems they work on.• Social Studies teachers scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as maps, atlases, and illustrations to increase comprehension. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Every student is assessed every 9 weeks. We analyze our Baseline, Interim, and Final Assessments to ensure that all students are gaining profiency in each content area. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Teachers utilize differentiated instructional strategies to support students’ language needs. There is a strong ongoing emphasis on interdisciplinary instruction that focuses on language-across-the-curriculum. Clubs, such as the Drama Club and Newspaper Clubs, provide a more relaxing forum in which students can work on a host of language skills, such as creative writing, speaking, presentation, and listening skills. Additionally, developing language skills is the primary focus and involves all teachers in the school. Since SIFE students can have intermittent educational backgrounds, it is important to discover their strengths. SIFE students must be assessed in literacy as well as content area skills. SIFEs are to be continually assessed in literacy and math levels in their native language and English. Once assessed, an intensive math and literacy program that addresses the basics of each skill is created to maintain progress. Many SIFE students have experienced traumas or inconsistency in their young lives, so it is important to form a comfortable environment that new social norms and language can flourish. One way to achieve this is to involve parents in home reading and math instruction. Literacy at home is paramount to progress at school, and native language reading is encouraged in the home. Intervention services are created not only to address academic norms but social norms and practices of the school. Many SIFES are not conditioned to classroom procedures or time constraints, therefore these skills need to be taught like any other academic skill or strategy. An individualized action plan to properly differentiate each program for each student is the most effective way to instruct students. At the school, we target a pedagogue to create a supportive environment utilizing counseling services, literacy and math coaches. It’s important to introduce students to empathetic and friendly students to be ambassadors for that student. SIFE’s emotional as well as academic progress should be monitored continually by working with the guidance counselors, parents, and pedagogues. To accelerate learning in SIFEs, teachers can use multiple modalities, such as art, kinesthetic activities, and technology. The enrichment programs at the school, such as after school excursions and overnight trips to facilitate enjoyment as well as rigor in education. We realize the importance of consistency of teachers to SIFEs. Therefore, we 6  will attempt to maintain same teachers whenever possible throughout schedule changes by monitoring programming of the SIFE. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Once ELLs test out of the freestanding ESL program at our school, they still receive services. Service is maintained via testing accommodations. The school can create AIS or language enrichment program for the student if applicable to make sure they are performing at grade level. Communication must be open and consistent with parents. Students are allotted two years of support after testing proficient. We currently have 7 students who obtained a Transitioning or Expanding score on the NYSESLAT. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL students with IEPs are either in ICT classrooms with ELL certified teachers or have ELL services provided via an ELL teacher that pushes into their ICT classrooms. All classroom teachers, whether ELL, General Education or Special Education are aware of the students' IEP goals. They work collaboratively to support our students in achieving their IEP goals and implement strategies to assist students with language acquisition. In addition, our school recently increased the number of content and academic intervention courses that we offer our students by extending the number of periods that we offer from 7 to 8 periods. Also, all 9th grade students take either two periods of English or a Math AIS class, depending on their need, in addition to a double period of Algebra. This specifically supports our ELLs with IEPs with their transition from middle school to high school, by giving them additional support in key academic areas of need. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In order to support learning and foster community involvement, we use a portion of our funding to create supplementary programs for ELLs and their families. These include: • Saturday Academy: Our Saturday Academy offers both remediation and enrichment in Science, Mathematics, and English for a number of Saturdays during each semester. • Family Celebrations: Throughout the year, parents come to the school to take part in community celebrations, including the Holiday Luncheon, Family Day, the Annual Parent Fair, and the Latino Film Festival. At these events, the school and community can come together to recognize student achievements in arts and academics. • Translation and Interpretation Services: These services are offered to increase the involvement of parents in the TBE program, additional funding is available to translate important policy documents, mainly in Spanish or in Bengali. Among the documents we have made available is the school’s Comprehensive Education Plan. Additionally, interpretation services are a daily help in communication between school staff and parents.• Summer Bridge: Our summer bridge program is designed to help all students make a successful transition into our school.. Each teacher at CTEA administers a Baseline assessment, Interim assessments, and Final assessments. These exams are administered and analyzed every 9 weeks. A copy of each assessment is submitted to each department Assistant Principal for review and approval. The goal is to ensure that all assessments are ready and finalized before the start of the school year. This enables all teachers to plan their lessons for mastery of the skills and key Common Core Standards that will be assessed on the Regents and Advanced Placement exams. In order to ensure that our teachers have sufficient planning time to collaborate with their colleagues and develop assessments, analyze their results, and develop instructional plans, each teacher is assigned to a Common Planning team for each subject and grade that they teach. During this time, teachers analyze our school’s previous Regents’ results and determine which key Common Core Standards, skills, and content need further emphasis in their instruction. During this time teachers set specific goals and continuously monitor their results to determine the modifications and improvements that must occur in their classrooms and during targeted tutoring. Teachers also rely heavily on this information to determine how and when to differentiate their instruction and develop interventions and extending thinking activities for their students that reach all our subgroups. After each assessment, teachers case conference with their students to share their results and continuously monitor their individual student goals. This information is also shared with the grade team and students who are not meeting their individual goals as well as their teacher’s goals are further supported. Students reflect on their own data to determine how they performed on their assessments. We use this opportunity to give students time to self reflect on their goals. Teachers Include targeted 7  students for tutoring and remediation in their Instructional plans. If an ELL student needs remediation, they will be required to attend tutoring before or after school as well as Saturday school academy. We have implemented inquiry team projects, where all teachers are engaging in department wide learning problems, and a couple of the ELL students are included in the subgroups. In addition to our regualr ESL program, our SWD-ELL students are provided mandated counseling (if applicable), one-on-one tutoring, and additional social service support as needed. All of our transfer SWD-ELLs are carefully evaluated at intake by our committee on special education and in careful consultation with the student and family are placed in the least restrictive environment. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Increased literacy in all core subjects. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our school offers a range of intervention services in ELA, math, and other content areas to target ELL subgroups properly. Students receive services on a differentiated basis. Each student receives AIS through an individualized plan. In addition to AIS classes, test accommodation training and counseling (i.e. dictionary and glossary workshops,) for all ELL subgroups before Regents exams to ensure student can utilize services. Native Language glossaries and accommodations for all ELL subgroups are available. There daily tutoring in all content areas for all subgroups to maintain grade level proficiency in content area. The school will continue to target Long-Term, SIFE and 4-6 year ELLs who are at-risk for drop out and create a monitoring system using a team of pedagogues and counselors to intervene. We will create peer groups that target individual needs of students via AIS. Our Clubs: Robotics Art Better Earth Music Chess Dance Amname Yearbook Philosophy Aditionally, all ELL students are encouraged to attend both before and afterschool tutoring as well as the Regents Preparatory classes. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The Freestanding ESL program does not use a particular text, using literacy instruction as an element within the framework of the America’s Choice Workshop Model. This includes the use of high interest / grade level texts. The exception to this pattern is where materials are used to familiarize students with the state assessments, including:• Attanasio and Associates Getting Ready for the New NYSESLAT• New York State Coach: ELA• New York State Coach: MathematicsThe ESL libraries contain age and language level appropriate texts such as graphic novels, and native language books and dictionaries. We also have two PC computer labs and one Macintosh lab. We also have a number of Smart Boards, five labtops carts, and each classroom is equipped with a computer. We also have a fully stocked library and a full time librarian in our school.Since our ELLS are advanced, the materials and technology are differentiated on a case by case basis 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Translation and Interpretation Services: These services are offered to increase the involvement of parents in the TBE program, additional funding is available to translate important policy documents, mainly in Spanish. Among the documents we have 8  made available is the school’s Comprehensive Education Plan. Additionally, interpretation services are a daily help in communication between school staff and parents. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services are based on our ELLs specific academic and social emotional needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The Freestanding ESL program does not use a particular text, using literacy instruction as an element within the framework of the America’s Choice Workshop Model. This includes the use of high interest / grade level texts. The exception to this pattern is where materials are used to familiarize students with the state assessments, including:• Attanasio and Associates Getting Ready for the New NYSESLAT• New York State Coach: ELA• New York State Coach: MathematicsThe ESL libraries contain age and language level appropriate texts such as graphic novels, and native language books and dictionaries. We also have two PC computer labs and one Macintosh lab. We also have a number of Smart Boards, five labtops carts, and each classroom is equipped with a computer. We also have a fully stocked library and a full time librarian in our school.Since our ELLS are advanced, the materials and technology are differentiated on a case by case basis. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our summer bridge program is designed to help all studnets make a successful transition into our school culture. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish, Creative Writing 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ESL teacher receives high-quality and ongoing professional development to enable all children in the School wide Program to meet the State’s student academic standards.• Professional development curriculum in 2017/2018 is focused on teachers continually to embed literarcy in all core subjects.• All teachers are responsible for language acquisition, therefore support for all staff and for individual teachers are provided by our Department Lead Teachers. Planning for these PD sessions are the responsibility of our Instructional Specialist, Ms. Bernadette Bernstein and Ms. Han. • All teachers in our school participate on our weekly PD sessions. Our focus this year is on language and literacy development and the use of effective actionable feedback for students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 9  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We assist teachers' monitoring the academic progress of our students in an effort to secure their succes in transitioning into high school. This is done through the use of class assessment in comparison to the subject baseline assessment. Guidance counselors also provide these students with the emotional support if needed.Our PD focus is on language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for all students, including English language learners. These PD sessions are intended for every school teacher regardless of their subject area. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers and parent meet once a year at a minimum, during the IEP annual review, to discuss the goals for student academic success and the progress towards its completion. At this meeting, student data in regards to language development, proficiency, needs and progress shared. This includes classroom data from all content area teachers, and from the ELL teacher. IEP goals are discussed including the ELL goals and strategies that will be implemented to ensure the students' achieve the goals. If there is a need for interpretation we use the school resources when possible. We also use the Translation Unit for low incidence languages. Parents are invited to this meeting via mail, telephone and email reminders since their presence at this meeting is essential to developing a school-home partnership to secure their child success. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. . . Our school has the same expectations for all families; including the parents of ELLs. The activities that we conduct to increase parent involvement are as follows: • Parent Focus Groups with translation services. • Parent Surveys are provided in the native language of the student’s families.• School distributes monthly newsletters and calendars notifying parents of opportunities, developments and upcoming events. Materials are provided in English, Spanish, and Arabic. The staff makes phone master calls. Content not only includes important notices, but also daily attendance. • Parent educational events are held regularly. Annual events include senior college night, junior college night, freshmen orientation, Freshmen Bridge, to help integrate families into school culture. • Parents are kept informed and meaningfully involved in their students’ education through a number of ways. At the main desk, multi-lingual hand-out translations are displayed. Information is disseminated to parents at orientation sessions, monthly PTA meetings, School Leadership Team meetings, monthly mailings and our monthly parent newsletter: SYNERGY. Administrators, counselors/grade advisors/college advisors conduct small group counseling with students and/or with parents; conduct parent meetings; parent-teacher conferences; we • organize meetings/seminars for parents on the New Standards, Regents exams, and graduation requirements. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0  1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lakeisha Gordon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: HSCTEA School DBN: 27Q650 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Lakeisha Gordon Title Principal Rivky Broyde Assistant Principal Kimberly Seaton Parent Coordinator Jason Salamanca ENL/Bilingual Teacher Becky Sepulveda Parent Meisi Lau Teacher/Subject Area Christina Auriemma Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Vera Nigai School Counselor Elaine Lindsey Jennifer Dull Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/15/2018 9/15/2018 9/15/2018 9/15/2018 9/15/2018 9/15/2018 09/15/2018 09/15/2018 09/15/2018 09/15/2018 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 27Q650 School Name: The High School for Construction Tr Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kimberly Seaton Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school follows an initial identification process to conclude which students may be ELLs. The first step is the Home Language Survey (HLIS) form for all new students to the NYC Board of Education. These HLIS forms are available in the language of the family’s choice or preference. After the HLIS is filled out, the parent is interviewed by a pedagogue for more clarification if a language other than English is spoken at home. At our school, the ESL teacher or Administrator conducts interviews with new enrollees. The informal interview is conducted in the native language of the parent in which they feel comfortable. A translator is provided if needed. They will decide the formal initial assessment and determine if the student should be given the LAB-R if necessary. If the student is eligible for the LAB-R it will be administered and hand scored within the first ten days of enrollment. To ensure that parents understand all three program choices available (transitional Bilingual, Dual Language and Freestanding ESL), a parent orientation is created. The parents invited have students who are eligible for each program and are encouraged to make a selection within ten days. The EPIC DVD is shown and the research about each program is explained to assist with their choice. A parent selection is made before what is offered at the 4  school is explained. Freestanding ESL is the only program available at our school, and if parents would like Transitional Bilingual or Dual Language, our guidance counselor, a guidance counselor or our parent coordinator will assist with information about schools that can better suit their choice. Handouts of available programs at schools around the city are made from the ELL website. Our staff is maintaining documents and files to monitor trends of parental selection of Transitional Bilingual and Dual Language programs. This data will be kept on file. These trends will be monitored in the case that we can tally twenty parents; we can contact them and offer this program. If parents do not select a program within ten days, transitional bilingual program is chosen by default, and they will not be admitted into our school, since we do not offer that program. An outreach is made by our parent coordinator to explain this choice and prepare them for their new school. ESL entitlement letters are printed out in the native language of the parents from the DOE website and given to the parents in person or mailed home. Many students also take the letters home and bring them back to school. Parents either return the letter that day by filling it out in the office, or send it back with the student to school. If an entitlement letter is not returned for a new student, a transitional bilingual program is chosen by default. Although parents are informed about the variety of ELL programs, they mostly choose ESL because that is the program that we offer at our school and appropriate for their child’s needs.100% of the parents that we have interviewed selected Free Standing ESL. Our ELL program model is aligned with parental request. Although parents have consistently selected Free Standing ESL, our school is developing a system to track request for TBL and Dual Language in case the interest arises in the future. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese French Hindi Malagasy Mandarin Nepali English Tagalog Panjabi Polish Portugese Spanish Urdu 3 9 65 24 2 6 1 0 2 1086 2 33 7 1 279 2 0.2 0.59 4.27 1.58 0.13 0.39 0.07 0 0.13 71.35 0.13 2.17 0.46 0.07 18.33 0.13 3 9 65 19 2 6 1 4 2 1084 2 36 7 1 279 2 0.2 0.59 4.27 1.25 0.13 0.39 0.07 0.26 0.13 71.22 0.13 2.37 0.46 0.07 18.33 0.13 5  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English (71.35) Spanish (18.33) Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 6 times per year 6 times per year Sept-June Written Translation Written Translation Written Translation Report Cards Transcripts Newsletter 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Financial Aide Night Parent Conferences November 2017 2 times per year Two Truth's And Lie workshop October 2017 Cyber bullying Workshop Focus Brunch New Year, New You Skeulda Workshop Get Fit Paint with Parents Workshop Mental Health Stigma's in the Caribbean Culture November 2017 December 2017 January 2018 February 2018 March 2018 April 2018 May 2018 Translator Translator Translator Translator Translator Translator Translator Translator Translator Translator 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Phone Master will call home and provide the required information in the family's home or preferred language. 6  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school has the same expectations for all families; including the parents of ELLs. The activities that we conduct to increase parent involvement are as follows: • Parent Focus Groups with translation services. • Parent Surveys are provided in the native language of the student’s families. • School distributes monthly newsletters and calendars notifying parents of opportunities, developments and upcoming events. Materials are provided in English, Spanish, and Arabic. The staff makes daily phone master calls. Content not only includes important notices, but also daily attendance. • Parent educational events are held regularly. Annual events include senior college night, junior college night, freshmen orientation, Freshmen Bridge, to help integrate families into school culture. • Parents are kept informed and meaningfully involved in their students’ education through a number of ways. At the main desk, multi-lingual hand-out translations are displayed. Information is disseminated to parents at orientation sessions, monthly PTA meetings, School Leadership Team meetings, monthly mailings and our monthly parent newsletter. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Comprehensive Education Plan, Parent Teacher Conferences, Phone Master, Back to School Night, Newsletter, Back packed letter home about translation services, brochures, and parent workshops Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Surveys, Focus Group with Parent Coordinator 7 
