 25Q792 School Name: NORTH QUEENS COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: WINSTON MCCARTHY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: North Queens Community High School 342500011792 School Number (DBN): 25Q792 Transfer School (9 - 12) Grades Served: School Address: 141-25 77 th Road, Flushing, NY 11367 Phone Number: 718-380-1650 Fax: 718-380-2189 School Contact Person: Winston McCarthy Email Address: wmccart@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Winston G. McCarthy Christopher Lavas Keteline C. Luzeus Janene Pearson Sandra Rodriguez Mark Rampersaud Max Louis Clinton Bryant Geographical District: 25 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 198 ForsythStreet, New York , NY 10002 PRotond@schools@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 646-654-1261 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Affinity Group Field Support Executive Director: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director’s Office Address: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 Executive Director’s Email Address: AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov   Phone Number: 718-935-5618 Fax: 718-935-5941   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Winston G. McCarthy Christopher Lavas Keteline C. Luzeus DharamdathRamharak Sandra Rodriguez AnibalRodriguez Max Louis Clinton Bryant Tarwinder Kaur Arthur Piccininni Darnell Gooden Lisa Martinez Janene Pearson Diana Lakins Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative Parent Member Parent Member Parent Member Parent Member Asst. Principal Parent Member   Name FrancelliaMcGee Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission Statement North Queens Community High School is a partnership between the New York City Department of Education and SCO Family of Services that is committed to working with overage and under-credited young people and their families. In a community that is collaborative, caring, and rigorous, young people are supported towards achieving their highest personal and academic goals. Using the best youth development practices, we provide a personalized learning environment that connects, motivates, and inspires our young people to overcome obstacles and graduate   with a high school diploma. Our students will leave us with the knowledge and skills necessary to forge a positive future for themselves and become contributing members in their community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. School Context North Queens Community High School is a Good Shepherd Services Model Transfer School. As such it is co-led by a NYC DOE principal and a CBO (SCO Family of Services) program director. Our school works exclusively with overage, under-credited students who are 16 – 21 years old and an average of 1 ½ to 2 ½ years behind in high school. Our students come to our school with varying social-emotional needs, as well as different numeracy and literacy skill gaps. To help address these needs, we have Advocate Counselors who provide personalized and intensive support to help our students acquire the skills, knowledge, attitudes, and behavioral changes needed to complete their education, develop post-secondary plans, and create better futures. Because our students and families have had numerous negative school experiences prior to coming to our school, the overarching goal is to support our students in overcoming barriers to graduation. Partnership: The strong partnership between the DOE and SCO Family of Services provides the basis for the comprehensive supports that students receive at North Queens Community High School. Moving students towards graduation and college and career readiness is a collaborative effort between all staff – both DOE and SCO. Meetings between SCO and DOE staff occur on a regular basis and there is a strong sense of collaboration between both groups in order to provide a seamless educational experience for all of our students. Advocate counselors support the work of teachers in classrooms by providing individual and group counseling to students. They work with students to develop and implement graduation and post-secondary plans, and monitor their academic progress. Outcomes – Mastery Grading: Our school now uses an Outcomes-Mastery grading system based on Blooms Taxonomy instead of one based on numbers. This was a purposeful change designed to shift conversations with students about academic progress from one about passing and failing to one about moving up a ladder of growth. Conversations focus more on the quality and depth of thinking instead of on volume of work. Students receive letter grades on their report cards indicating their level of progress on Outcomes (proficiency targets). All outcomes and assessments are aligned to the Common Core standards. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special student populations include students with disabilities, English Language Learners, overage and under-credited students, and students in temporary housing. Students with disabilities need both social-emotional and academic supports, particularly reading, writing, and counseling support. English Language Learners need supports for building reading and writing skills. Overage and under-credited students need a small personalized learning environment, social-emotional supports, a responsive standards-based curriculum, clear expectations, and attendance improvement supports. Students in temporary housing need counseling and economic supports. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. ELEMENTS OF FRAMEWORK FOR GREAT SCHOOLS 0  AREAS OF MOST PROGRESS Rigorous Instruction Our school has made significant progress the past three years in aligning and calibrating our outcomes/mastery grading systems across all content areas. We have improved the clarity, measurement, and transparency of all outcomes/proficiency targets. In addition, we collaboratively developed a learning target model for each performance level, using one of our school-wide outcomes. This model helped to tighten teacher practices on grading assignments and providing helpful feedback to students. It also improved teacher understanding of how to provide students with a clear learning path from the lower levels of Bloom’s taxonomy to the higher critical thinking levels. The system has become not only a means to measure student performance and progress, but also informs our approach to teaching and learning. In addition, unit and lesson plans across all content areas are now aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and vetted against the tri-state rubric and Bloom’s taxonomy. This has led to a marked increase in expectations for performance, particularly in reading and writing. All content areas (including math) support our school-wide expectation that all students improve their skills in argumentative writing supported by textual evidence (from close reading). The past three years have shown a modest increase in students’ ability to both identify and independently develop claims supported by textual evidence. There continues to be, however, a significant gap in their ability to develop counterclaims thoroughly and support them with textual evidence. Supportive Environment Personal and Academic Behaviors: Over the past four years we worked to integrate personal and academic behaviors into advisories, individual counseling sessions, and classrooms. We focus specifically on productive persistence and it's impact on the rate with which students complete assignments. As we continue to make significant progress, this is both an area of celebration and an area of focus. Last year, because of changes in staff we lost some of our expertise in implementing some of our successful intervention strategies. With new staff, we are in the process of rebuilding our capacity to use the strategies of productive persistence to support some of our most struggling students to increase the number of assignments they complete at expected standards. We will focus specifically on areas of belonging, value, growth mindset, and the ability to succeed. The expectation is that students will also revise and improve the quality of their work as a result of feedback from teachers and counselors. Collaborative Teachers We continue to be proud of the growth in the effectiveness of our teacher teams. All teachers are organized into two types of teams: Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) interdisciplinary teams and subject-area Lesson Study Teams. This past year the MOSL teams met weekly on Tuesdays to analyze student work and develop strategies to address Common Core Learning Standards writing gaps. Specifically, the work focused on improving argumentative writing and citing textual evidence. The Lesson Study teams used collaborative planning and inter-visitations to help team members improve specific teaching strategies that resulted in increased student outcomes. Because of teacher collaborative teamwork, modest gains were noted in students' ability to support claims and counter claims 1  with textual evidence. All Lesson Study teams reported teacher growth in using effective scaffolds, a Learning Target Framework, productive group work, and annotating text to engage students cognitively in learning. AREA(S) OF FOCUS Rigorous Instruction Like the previous year, the data from our most recent administration of the NYC ELA Performance Assessment indicate that although we have made modest gains in students’ ability (including English Language Learners and students with disabilities) to craft claims supported by textual evidence, a significant gap remains in students’ ability to write counterclaims fairly and thoroughly supported by the most relevant textual evidence. Thus, even as we continue to help students build their skills in writing claims supported by textual evidence, we will focus more explicitly on helping students improve their skills in writing counter-claims supported by textual evidence. . 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 25Q792 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 207 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 3 4 2 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 108 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 68.6% % Reduced Lunch 5.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 37.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 9.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.26 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 39% 35% 8.4% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO No N/A 6 5 53.5% 1.4% 19.3% 42.0% 8.7% 1.9% 2 8% 6.5 N/A N/A 59% 31% 44.7% 1% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) set the demand for planning and designing rigorous curricula and instruction, and the application of knowledge through higher-order thinking skills. For our transfer school students who have experienced many obstacles in their previous high schools and lag behind their peers, achieving mastery of Common Core Learning Standards is an even greater challenge. It is particularly challenging as many of our overage, under-credited students have had significant disruption in the continuity of their education and come to us with wide variations in skill gaps, particularly in reading and writing. We will continue to invest significant amounts of time, professional development opportunities and supportive resources to adapt, develop, and modify curricula that meet NYS Standards (for the remaining Regents exams), Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and the requirements for College and Career readiness. All core subject area teachers have aligned and refined their course curricula to meet the demands of the CCLS. In addition, the needs of our Transfer School overage and under-credited population have demanded appropriate scaffolds for learning that address reading and writing across curricular areas and building conceptual understanding in math. Data from curricular unit assessments, Regents and Common Core exams, and periodic assessments (NYC ELA Performance Assessment) continue to indicate that a significant portion of our students is not achieving expected outcomes, particularly in writing arguments supported by textual evidence. The data from our most recent administration of the NYC ELA Performance Assessment indicate that although we have made modest gains in students’ ability to craft claims supported by textual evidence, a significant gap remains in students’ ability to write claims and counterclaims supported by the most relevant textual evidence. Of the representative sample student essays, there was a 9 % increase in students scoring level 3 on the assessment rubric for counterclaims. Thus, even as we continue to help students build their skills in writing claims supported by textual evidence, we will continue to focus more explicitly on helping students improve their skills in writing counter-claims supported by textual evidence. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 4  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 as a result of rigorous instruction, sample student essays will show a 10 – 15 % increase year over year in students scoring level 3 on the NYC ELA performance assessment rubric for counter-claims. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Cross-disciplinary MOSL teacher teams will meet once per week to engage in cycles of analysis of student data from the NYC ELA Performance Assessment and student work products, determine skill gap patterns and trends, develop intervention strategies, implement strategies, assess skill growth and collect data, and revise and implement strategies in response to data. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students September 2018 – May 2019 Teachers, Principal, Asst. Principal, Instructional Coach Administration and grading of the NYC ELA Performance Assessment. Students Analysis of student assessment data from the January 2018 Common Core ELA Regents exam for trends and patterns. Students Selection of target group (students common to teachers on the team) for study Students Teachers, Principal, Asst. Principal, Instructional Coach Teachers, Principal, Asst. Principal, Instructional Coach Teachers, Principal, Asst. Principal, Instructional Coach September-October 2018; March 2019, May-June 2019 September-October 2018; March 2019, May-June 2019 Beginning of Trimester 1, Trimester 2 & Trimester 3 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. North Queens Community High School has a rolling admissions process. Students graduate at the end of each trimester and new students are admitted at the start of each trimester. Because of this, we will engage with and support our families in their understanding of rigorous instruction and the Common Core Learning Standards during student intake, student orientation, open school events, monthly Parent Association Meetings, scheduled Family Meetings, and on our website. Our Asst. Principal, CBO Program Director, Asst. Director, CBO Advocate Counselors, and assigned teaching staff will be key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 6  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. RESOURCE HUMAN RESOURCES INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES DETAILS Principal Asst. Principal Coaches Teacher teams Partner Organizations Protocols Rubrics Laptop computers Google Apps January and June 7  SCHEDULE CHANGES Common Core ELA Regents exams Student Work Student surveys Schedules for Common Planning Time After school PD sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 a representative sample of student essays from the Spring administration of the NYC ELA Performance Assessment will show a 5% – 10% % increase in students scoring level 3 on the assessment rubric for counter-claims (year over year). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) NYC ELA Performance Assessment Rubric 8  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school has a strong partnership between SCO Family of Services and the Department of Education and traditionally has had a high grade in the areas of support and safety on the Learning Environment Survey. However, due to changes in CBO leadership, we have experienced some shifts in our overall data that we must address. We are striving to maintain our Quality Review, well-developed standing on Indicator 3.4 (School Culture) which was also an area of celebration in the past. Currently, every student in our school is assigned an advocate counselor through SCO Family of Services who works closely with students to overcome obstacles that have gotten in the way of their success in their previous school. Through the use of productive persistence, we will increase the support provided for students by the members of our community while enhancing the structures and practices that we have previously implemented. Our learning community will foster these practices to help students develop the skills necessary to attain their goal of becoming a high school graduate. SCO Family of Services staff and Department of Education staff will continue to work together to address both the academic and social/emotional needs of students on an on-going basis. Maintaining the collaborative relationship that exists between both agencies, supports the anecdotal evidence that is collected each year from our graduating classes. The evidence reinforces that the relationship that students had with their advocate counselor and other adults in the school was crucial in helping them graduate from high school and be college and career ready. Built into our school day are many supports for students, including advisory meetings, individual counseling, conferencing in classrooms, meetings with individual students and families, and peer mediation. All adults are on a first-name basis with students and make an effort to know the students and families on their caseloads and in their classes. Our approach to students is anchored in the components of positive youth development, with particular emphasis on student's voice, high expectations, fostering persistence, and positive adult relationships. In past years, we have focused on promoting productive persistence in students. When the change in leadership occurred, the work which happened primarily in math classes using joint conferencing between the student, teacher, and advocate counselor ceased. A productive persistence rubric was used to help students self-assess themselves in four areas of student agency—student, growth mindset, school and academic class value, the belief that ‘I can succeed at this,’ and student sense of belonging. Students and adults worked together to set strategies and goals towards improving productive persistence which led to increased student engagement and success in certain classes where conferencing was utilized. Based on data collected during that period, there was a marked increase in our Math Regent’s outcomes. As a result of our past success, we intend to revisit and implement the learning from the productive persistence experience on a broader scale by connecting the methods used to our House System. We will continue to expand our focus on productive persistence and joint conferencing in each House and also in student’s classes, particularly where they struggle with belonging, value, growth mindset, and the ability to succeed. As a result of the work, we expect to note, an increase in the number and frequency with which students in our lowest third, attend school and class and complete and hand in assignments. 0  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as result of supportive work in productive persistence, a target group of students (lowest third), will show a 15 – 20% decrease in the number of incomplete assignments in selected classes. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PD for teachers and advocate counselors on productive persistence and use of rubric and other tools Teachers, advocate counselors September 2018 Joint conferencing between student, advocate counselor, and teachers Students in targeted classes On-going Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Meetings to discuss student progress Survey students to asses Growth Mind Set and productive persistence attitudes in targeted classes and in each house. Teachers and Advocate Counselors once per week Students in targeted classes Beginning of each trimester CBO Assistant Program Director, Principal, Assistant Principal, and Attendance Coordinator Assistant CBO Program Director, Principal, Assistant Principal, Attendance Coordinator and Guidance Counselor Designated leader Assistant Program Director, Principal, Attendance Coordinator, Advocate Counselors, and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage with and support our families in their understanding of Supportive Environment during student intake, student orientation, open school events, monthly Parent Association Meetings, scheduled Family Meetings, and on our website. The Principal, Asst. Principal, CBO Program Director, Asst. Director, CBO Advocate Counselors, DOE Guidance Counselor, Attendance Coordinator, Community Assistant, and teaching staff will be key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. RESOURCE HUMAN RESOURCES DETAILS Principal, Assistant Principal Assistant CBO Program Director, Partner organizations Guidance Counselor Attendance Coordinator Teachers Advocate counselors 3  Rubrics Protocols Laptop computers, Ipads Surveys, Feedback templates Schedules for common planning time Weekly Administrative Team Meetings Joint Staff Team INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES SCHEDULE CHANGES Collaborative Meetings 4  Meetings Attendance Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as result of supportive work in productive persistence, a target group of students (lowest third), will show a 5 – 10% decrease in the number of incomplete assignments in selected classes.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Bi-Weekly Benchmark Reports Cards showing the number and frequency of Incomplete grades. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Since we opened in September 2007, teacher collaboration has been a central component of how we develop, implement, and change structures and practices to improve student academic performance and the culture of our school. The principal and other instructional leaders of the school firmly believe that it is through the collaborative work of teacher teams, advocate counselor teams, and school leadership teams, that the most effective, consistent, and enduring school-wide practices will be established. Teacher Inquiry teams were formed the first year of the school and have continued every year since that time. For teachers and advocate counselors who have been with the school for at least 3 years, the skills of working collaboratively to improve student achievement are well established. This has resulted in exemplary team work, as seen during our school’s last Quality Review where this part of the work was rated well-developed. Our population of students changes significantly from year to year because of rolling admission and graduation. As mentioned earlier, students bring wide variations in knowledge and skill gaps. To prepare them to meet the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and College and Career readiness, teacher collaboration is critical. As a result, teacher teams at our school work together to assess and identify the extent of the skill gaps in student work. Teacher teams also develop and implement strategies to address those gaps and to re-assess and monitor student growth over time. Data from the Regents Common Core exam in English Language Arts and the NYC Performance Assessment in ELA show significant and persistent gaps in students' ability to write argumentative essays, particularly in making claims and counter claims supported by textual evidence. A smaller percentage of students also struggle with the elaboration of claims and organization of ideas. MOSL teacher teams sometimes struggle with developing and successfully implementing effective strategies to address these writing gaps. Therefore, it is a priority to support teams in the development and implementation of effective strategies to address and close the identified skills gaps. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of collaborative teacher teamwork, 60 - 70% of a targeted group of students (lowest third) will increase their writing skills on 3 components of the NYC ELA Performance Assessment rubric by at least one level (year over year). 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Cross-disciplinary MOSL teacher teams will each meet once per week to engage in cycles of analysis of student data from the NYC ELA Performance Assessment and student work products, determine skill gap patterns and trends, develop intervention strategies, implement strategies, assess skill growth and collect data, and revise and implement strategies in response to data. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students September 2018 – May 2019 Teachers, Principal, Asst. Principal, Instructional Coach Administration and grading of the NYC ELA Performance Assessment. Students September-October 2018; Teachers, Principal, Asst. Principal, Instructional Coach March 2019, May-June 2019 Oct – Nov 2018 and the beginning of each trimester Oct – Nov 2018 and the beginning of each trimester 2-3x per Trimester 2-3x per Trimester Students common to MOSL teams Students common to MOSL team Students common to MOSL teams Students common to MOSL teams MOSL teacher teams, Principal, Asst. Principal MOSL teacher teams, Principal, Asst. Principal MOSL teacher teams, Principal, Asst. Principal MOSL teacher teams, Principal, Asst. Principal Identify common students from baseline assessment data and select a group of target students Review and disaggregate student baseline assessment data Discuss student work and identify skill gaps Discuss, identify, develop strategies to address skill gaps and implement the strategies and collect data 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 7  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage with and support our families in their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations during student orientation, open school events, monthly Parent Association Meetings, scheduled Family Meetings, and on our website. The Principal, Asst. Principal, CBO Program Director, Asst. Director, CBO Advocate Counselor leads, and teacher leaders will be key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. RESOURCE HUMAN RESOURCES INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES DETAILS Teacher teams Coaches Principal Asst. Principal Partner Organizations Protocols Rubrics Computer technology 8  SCHEDULE CHANGES Google Apps Student Work Student surveys Schedules for Common Planning Time After school PD sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of collaborative teacher teamwork, 30 - 35% of a targeted group of students (lowest third) will increase their writing skills on 3 components of the Common Core assessment rubric by at one level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC ELA Performance Assessment Rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The principal and other school leaders believe that improving teacher effectiveness drives improvement in student academic outcomes. This is best achieved through developing and deepening teacher knowledge and skills in best, research-based practices, to drive student learning. As such, providing ongoing, relevant, and helpful professional development opportunities for teacher learning is central to our improvement efforts. Over the past seven years, the professional development opportunities we have provided for teacher learning have evolved to a more data-driven and personalized approach that supports teacher growth more effectively. For example, using the Danielson’s Framework as our standard for effective teaching, we have collected and studied sufficient data to conclude that components 3C (Engaging students in learning) and 3D (Using Assessment in Instruction) are high leverage components on which to focus our attention. We have also learned that for our population of students, sharing a Learning Target Framework helps students understand the knowledge and skill goals for the lesson, clarifies where they are at the beginning of the lesson, charts a learning path for a particular lesson, including a performance of understanding, and a set of student look-fors to support feedback to students, and for student self-assessment. Observation and classroom walk-through data show that presently, 90% of all teachers use Learning Target Frameworks in all of their lessons. However, only 70% of all teachers develop and explicitly use student look-fors effectively to provide helpful feedback during conferencing with students. Using student look-fors to assess student progress and provide helpful feedback to drive learning forward is an important component of the Learning Target Theory of Action. Our ultimate goal is for all teachers to effectively use student look-fors as part of their Learning Target Framework in all lessons. We have learned from observation data, surveys, and conversations with teachers, that the present gap can be largely attributed to a lack of teacher understanding on how to implement this strategy effectively and not to teacher reluctance. Therefore, our priority is to continue to focus on building teacher competence and effectiveness in using this strategy to actively engage students in learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, as a result of effective school leadership, 80 - 90% of all teachers will use calibrated (Mastery Based) student look-fors in their Learning Target Frameworks to increase cognitive engagement for at least 80% of students in 75% of their observed lessons and walk-throughs. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Book Study on the effect of using a Learning Target Theory of Action, including student look-fors to increase cognitive engagement and deep learning for students. Using texts, Learning Targets (Moss & Brookhart, 2012) and Formative Classroom Walk-throughs (Moss & Brookhart, 2015) Teachers PD sessions on using a Learning Target Theory of Action, including student look-fors to increase cognitive engagement and deep learning for students Teachers Principal, Asst. Principal, Instructional Coach Principal, Asst. Principal, Instructional Coach Twice per month September 2018 – February 2019 Twice per month September 2018 – February 2019 Peer observation and feedback on using a Learning Target Theory of Action, including student look-fors to increase cognitive engagement and deep learning for students (lesson study). School leaders and coaches provide models and feedback on progress of using a Learning Target Theory of Action, including student look-fors to increase cognitive engagement and deep learning for students. Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, Principal, Asst. Principal, Instructional Coach Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Principal, Asst. Principal, Instructional Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage with and support our families in their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote parent leadership during monthly School Leadership Team meetings, monthly Parent Association Meetings, scheduled Family Meetings, and on our website. The Principal, Asst. Principal, CBO Program Director, and Asst. Director will be key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1  RESOURCE HUMAN RESOURCES INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES DETAILS Principal Asst. Principal Coaches Teacher leaders Protocols for lesson study Texts: Learning Targets (Moss & Brookhart, 2012) and Formative Classroom Walkthroughs (Mosss 2  SCHEDULE CHANGES & Brookhart, 2015) Rubrics Feedback templates Student Work Surveys Schedules for Common Planning Time After school PD sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of effective school leadership, 55-65% of all teachers will use student look-fors in their Learning Target Frameworks to increase cognitive engagement for at least 80% of students in 75% of their observed lessons and walk-throughs. 3  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Lesson and Unit Plans, Observation and Walk-through templates, Student Surveys will show an increase in the number of look-fors provided to students during assignments to support self-assessment for formative purposes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Beginning at intake, our school initiates a partnership with the parents and other significant adults in the lives of each student. Prior to enrolling in school, administrators engage students and parents in a family meeting, and an advocate counselor engages with the family during a home visit. These meetings provide an opportunity to set goals, discuss plans for graduation, and begin to establish a relationship of support for the student. After enrollment, this relationship continues through frequent interactions on the phone, through email, and in meetings to address concerns about attendance, progress in classes, and to celebrate accomplishments. Four years ago, we initiated a Future Focus program at our school. Potential graduates are identified prior to the start of the school year and are moved up to a caseload with a Future Focus counselor. Future Focus counselors work together to address issues unique to students in their senior year of high school, including developing a comprehensive post-secondary plan, exploring college and career options, applying to college, and remaining on track towards graduation. Parent engagement, specifically around post-secondary planning has increased since that change. To expand these positive efforts, we will aim to increase the positive outcomes of all parent meetings and interventions across the school. To address various student needs and concerns, our school provides numerous opportunities throughout the year where students and parents/guardians meet with advocate counselors, teachers and/or administrators. Quite frequently, these meetings have had a significant impact on student progress. However, only during the past two school years, we have started to assess the level of impact of these meetings, and we believe that it is important to continue to do so. Measuring impact will continue to provide us with data to assess how successful we are in leveraging strong family ties to support student progress. Two years ago, we began to implement the Sanctuary Model in our meetings. The Sanctuary tool kit provides a set of practical and simple intervention strategies that reinforce the language and philosophical framework of the Sanctuary Model. This will help us to track the outcomes of these meetings. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, based on end-of-meeting feedback surveys, 35 - 40% of parents/guardians will indicate a positive level of support for their child as satisfied. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  PD in family meeting strategies and conflict mediation Process feedback form after all meetings. Record data from meetings. PD on the Sanctuary Model for new members of staff and refresher for other staff Develop and refine meeting assessment survey. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Advocate Counselors, Teachers Advocate Counselors, Teachers Teachers, Advocate Counselors, Administrators Students and Families Sept 2018 – Oct 2018 CBO Staff Sept 2018- Jun 2019 CBO Director, Asst. Director, Advocate Counselors Aug 2018– Sept 2018 CBO Director, Asst. Director Advocate Counselors, CBO Assistant Director Aug 2018 – Sept 2018 and Jan 2019- Feb 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. SCO Family of Services Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. DETAILS Principal RESOURCE HUMAN RES6  OURCES Asst. Principal CBO Program Director CBO Asst. Program Director Advocate counselors teachers Coaches Protocols for conducting meetings Rubrics Feedback templates Surveys After schoINSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES SCHEDULE 7  CHANGES ol PD sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, based on end-of-meeting online feedback surveys, 20-25% of parents/guardians will indicate a positive level of support for their child as satisfied. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Online Google Survey, Paper Survey Forms will show levels of parent/guardian satisfaction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small groups, online learning, and one-on-one tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day Extended Day Saturday Prep Classes Small groups and one-on-one tutoring During school day Extended Day Saturday Prep Classes Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics ● Students with > 65% on the Regent’s Exam ● Students taking the exam in January, June, and August ● Students who earn less than three credits per trimester ● Students with IEP ● ESL Students ● Students who were not successful on the mock exam ● MOSL Pre and Post assessment ● Intake Assessment ● Students with > 65% on the Regent’s Exam ● Students taking the exam in January, June, and August ● Students who earn less than three credits per trimester ● Students with an IEP ● ESL Students ● Students who were not Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Provide Regents Prep during the week and on Saturdays to prepare for the exam. Provide extra support--extended day tutoring-- for individuals, and small groups to increase credit accumulation. Break long assignments into smaller, manageable increments Use visualization strategies Provide opportunities to make conceptual connections to real world experiences Provide experiences with manipulating numbers, problem solving and analytical reasoning 9  Science Social Studies successful on the mock exam ● MOSL Pre and Post assessment ● Intake Assessment Math Assessment (CUNYPlacement Exam) ● Students with > 65% on the Regent’s Exam ● Students taking the exam in January, June, and August ● Students who earn less than three credits per trimester ● Students with an IEP ● ESL Students ● Students who were not successful on the mock exam ● MOSL Pre and Post assessment ● Intake Assessment ● Students with > 65% on the Regent’s Exam ● Students taking the exam in January, June, and August ● Students who earn less than three credits per trimester ● Students with an IEP ● ESL Students ● Students who were not successful on the mock exam ● MOSL Pre and Post assessment Reading Comprehension Strategies: Determining Importance, Making Inferences, Questioning, summarizing Use visualization strategies Use hands-on activities Deliver instruction to promote student-student interactions Reading Comprehension Strategies: Determining Importance, Making Inferences, Questioning, summarizing Discovering relationships between facts and events Identifying and emphasizing key points Small groups and one-on-one tutoring During school day Extended Day Saturday Prep Classes Small groups and one-on-one tutoring During school day Extended Day Saturday Prep Classes 0  ● Intake Assessment Negative behavior patterns Low attendance patterns Substance abuse At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Behavior modification programs Learning to Work programs Regular one-on-one counseling Family counseling programs Drug treatment programs One-on-one, Small groups During school day and after school 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Student in Temporary Housing will receive one- on-one counseling and group counseling from our CBO staff and guidance counseling as needed. Each student will receive emergency school supplies when needed and be provided with other emergency support material and resources as issues arise. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment : Over the past 5 years we have partnered with New Visions to identify highly qualified teachers. Once identified, candidates are interviewed by a committee that consists of members of the DOE staff, CBO staff (SCO Family of Services), student body, and SLT/PTA (parent). In addition, each candidate is expected to provide the committee with a sample lesson plan and teach a demo lesson as part of the interview process. Retention : At NQCHS our teacher turnover rate is low. 71% of our teaching staff has been with us for 3-8 years, and 29% 1-2 years. We are able to retain our teaching staff because once a candidate is hired the staff member is: 1. Paired with a mentor teacher. 2. Provided with template unit plans and lesson plans that guide them through our modified workshop model and helps them align their instruction to the CCSS. 3. Given other essential materials to help guide their unit and lesson planning experience. a. UBD Text, Essential Question Text, and Formative Assessment Text b. Scope of Sequence, and relevant curriculum 4. Invited to attend our School-wide Professional Development Session that occurs in August before school starts to introduce current and new initiatives. 5. Provided with weekly professional development 6. Receives ongoing feedback from their peers and administrators 7. Included in our teacher team meetings Assignments : The most highly qualified teachers are assigned to teach each course. Presently, all courses offered at North Queens Community High School are taught by highly qualified teachers. Professional Development Sessions : Maintaining a highly qualified teaching staff is integral and is solidified by the professional development opportunities that are afforded to each staff member. The sessions are made available through: 1. New Visions 2. Principal 3. Literacy Coach 4. Teacher Leaders 5. Assistant Principal 6. Independent Online PD Resource (PD360) 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 4  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High quality professional development is made available to all staff members through various media and supported by teachers, administrators and instructional coaches to enable all students to meet the CCSS. Based upon the goals of the school, a professional development plan is developed collaboratively by a professional development committee. The sessions are planned to meet the needs of administrators and teachers and address school-wide instructional priorities. Observations and feedback to teachers, using the Danielson’s Framework, support individual teacher growth. During in-school professional development sessions, teachers collaborate and share best practices, develop unit and lesson plans, explore student work, create scaffolds to differentiate (address the needs of our ELL’s and SWD’s population), unpack reading material, and refine our outcomes/mastery based grading system. During these sessions, teachers work one-on-one, in small groups and as a whole staff; each session is planned by teachers and administrators. Externally supported professional development sessions are provided by New Visions, REDESIGN, and ESKOLTA. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At NQCHS we encourage the use of multiple assessment measures to provide both teachers, and students with ongoing feedback in regards to teaching and learning. As an Outcomes Based Grading school we focus on formative assessment and the use of blooms taxonomy to assess student progress. This academic year we will focus on incorporating conferencing as an additional tool to improve instruction. All staff members will participate in a book study and implement strategies over the course of one month periods. During the professional development we will: 5  1. Have sessions lead by the literacy coach, teachers (individual/group), principal, and or assistant principal. 2. Use a protocol to guide the group discussions 3. Use a REDESIGN Study Guide to explore the text 4. Reflect on the strategies implemented and provide supporting evidence 5. Identify best practices that support conferencing 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Sequester /2010 Census Title I SWP $7,971 Title I SWP $74,762 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $1,705,018 X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A, Part 4a, 5B, Part 4a, 5C, Part 4a, 5D, Part 4a, and 5E, Part 4a. Sections 5A, Part 4a, 5B, Part 4a, 5C, Part 4a, 5D, Part 4a, and 5E, Part 4a. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 6  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. North Queens Community High School in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students North Queens Community High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 8  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 9  ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) North Queens Community High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 0  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the No Child Left Behind Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 1  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 25 School Name North Queens Community High School Borough Queens School Number 792 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Winston McCarthy Coach Lew Gitelman ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Esther Nelson Teacher/Subject Area Joi Walker Teacher/Subject Area Noah Silverstein Related-Service Provider Abby Miller Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Janene Pearson Coach type here School Counselor Roldye Ceans Parent Marylu Guecia Parent Coordinator SCO Family of Services Field Support Center Staff Member Ana Vasquez Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 210 3 Total number of ELLs 11 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.24%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All students entering North Queens Community High School ("NQCHS") are transfers from another NYCDOE High School. At their point of entry, our ENL (ELL) students have already been identified. All students having entered North Queens Community High School over the past four years have demonstrated literacy skills far and above what would be considered "early literacy skills." Data from Teacher-created assessments indicate that ENL students present skill gaps in vocabulary attainment, coherent sentence and paragraph construction, and writing arguments supported by textual evidence. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? One of our school's ongoing focus is reading and writing across the curriculum. All teachers in all subject areas plan and strategies for vocabulary attainment through a focus on explicitly targeting meaning of key terms, visualizing key terms, building word walls in the classroom, and providing opportunities for students to use academic language in both speaking and writing. All teachers are expected to provide daily opportunities for all students, including ENL students, to do extended 4  writing guided by writing rubrics. Our ENL push-in teacher collaborates with the general education teachers in providing additional supports for ENL students through the planning of scaffolds to break down complex concepts, support the improvement of reading and writing skills, and addressing specific individual needs. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Assessments include the NYC ELA Performance task at the appropriate grade levels, Regents Mock Exams, and teacher-developed assessment tasks. The NYC ELA Performance task is used as a periodic assessment of argumentative writing and is administered in October, February, and May as our school operates in Trimesters. After each administration of an assessment, teachers engage in a careful analysis of student performance data, including an item analysis, to determine the student gaps and appropriate intervention strategies to address student needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? As we are a Transfer School for overage and under-credited students and operate without grade levels, identified learning gaps from summative data are addressed in cross-disciplinary and subject-area teacher teams. Teachers engage in cycles of inquiry to find the most effective teaching strategies to address student needs. Teacher teams meet once per week, while some subject-area teams meet daily during common planning time periods. As we have a push-in ENL model, ELL students receive intervention supports from the ELL teacher during regular class periods. Students may also receive additional tutoring before school, after school, or during lunch. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our pedagogical and support staff has been divided into data assessment teams that examine the results on the MOSL (Measures Of Student Learning) on a weekly basis. Individual strengths and areas of growth for all students, including our ENL students, are identified by this cross-disciplinary team that includes the ELL teacher, an ELA teacher, and other content area teachers. Progress is charted and reported to school leadership and feedback is provided to all pedagogues involved with our ELL population. Rigorous planning and instruction is the cornerstone of the academic program at NQCHS. All teachers maintain word walls of both general and specialized academic vocabulary for the benefit of their students. Graphic support, visualization, image re-enforcement create the scaffolding necessary for the high level of instruction to which ENL students and all of our students are entitled. Accountable talk, "turn and talk," and public speaking are the norm and not the exception in our classes. Our grading system is an outcomes-based/mastery based system in which Bloom's taxonomy creates the roadmap for rigor and high performance. Our ELL students consistently perform at a level equal to or beyond their English-speaking peers. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NQCHS ENL students traditionally perform strongly and at an advanced level in the areas of speaking and listening. They perform at a strong level in reading and have shown some weaknesses in the writing portions that seek to assess pin-point type language such as prepositional phrases. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? These findings are disseminated during professional development sessions on Thursdays after school and during teacher team meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming 5  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL teacher uses a "push-in" team-teaching approach with our ENL students. A determination is made each Cycle (Trimester) as to where (content area) the ELL teacher will push in based on the academic and linguistic needs of the ELL students and the required time that is to be provided based on their level. The ELL teacher works closely with the content area teacher in planning lessons, providing support during instruction and assessing the progress of ELL students. Our school programs students according to transcript need instead of in grade levels. Students are mixed heterogeneously and instruction is differentiated and individualized based on need. This approach adequately provides for the needs of ELL at a small, transfer high school with a very small ELL population b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? NQCHS consistently exceeds the required instructional minutes for all ELL students. Our instructional periods are 58 minutes long and the Advanced students receive ELL direct classroom support for no less than 290 minutes per week. That is approximately 90 more minutes than required. In cases of Intermediate students, we would double that amount. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our content instruction is delivered to our ENL students by the content area teachers with the in-class co-teaching assistance of the ELL teacher. There is collaborative planning of instruction and assessment. All staff at NQCHS teach completely guided by the Common Core Learning Standards and by the demands of Blooms Taxonomy. ENL students are supported by both the content area teacher and the ELL teacher in their pursuit of rigor. ENL students are expected to perform in the content area at the same level as their English-speaking peers. ENL students generate their own particular vocabulary lists, phrase lists, and record important academic and content special idiomatic expressions. Both the content area teacher and ELL teacher engage the ELL in regular student one-on-one conferencing to determine strengths, weaknesses, successes, share feedback and plan next steps. Smart goals are set for the ENL students in each content area by the specific pedagogues and evaluated on a regular basis with student, teachers, and parents. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We do not evaluate ENL students in their home languages at NQCHS. There is little or no record that any of our ENL students in attendance over the last seven years have had any recent instruction in their home language or have grade and academic skills appropriate to said instruction. We provide only a Free-Standing ESL Program at NQCHS. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6  ELL students are given programs and instruction relevant to their individual needs. Teachers work in cross-disciplinary teams twice per week to identify student needs and share best practices. Students with interruption in formai education are assisted in making the transition back to school in several ways. If students struggle with reading they enrolled in our English Seminar class where they supported with targeted reading instruction. The majority of our ENL students are Developing to Long-Term. Our Developing students receive a careful analysis of their vocabulary development and ability to identify and express academic concepts in English. They are encouraged to use subject-specific glossaries where necessary and the ENL student and content teachers are aware that more advanced or complex concepts may need to be re-visited often with a variety of linguistic scaffolding. Teachers are more aware of their need to change register or re-address pragmatics with Developing students. Our Long-Term students are challenged to make linguistic sense based on synonyms, prior English knowledge or academic experiences. They are challenged in their writing to more closely assimilate native syntax, structure, register and to almost fully understand the underlying pragmatics of written or spoken text. It should be noted that almost 100 percent of the ENL students attending NQCHS are "accent-free" by the time they reach us and few if any, struggle with the Basic Interpersonal Communications Skills and most academic language in spoken form does not present obstacles to them. Testing accommodations are provided for all ENL students. Testing accommodations for former ENL students may be provided based on their performance on in-class assessments and Regents exams. Former ENL students continue to have access to native language materials in the content classes if requested, in addition to glossaries on tests. Former ENL students, along with advanced ENL students, have the option to join an after-school English class for continued support. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? A variety of instructional models are used to ensure student success. ENL students are enrolled in team teaching classes in both their ENL and content coursework addressed. Additional pull out instruction is provided by their ENL teacher as needed. Extended day classes also provide opportunities for ENL-SWDs to receive additional support. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? A variety of instructional models are used to support the instructional needs of ELL-SWD. ENL-SWDs are programmed based on needs and the recommendations from their IEPs. Graphic support, visualization, image re-enforcement create the scaffolding necessary for the high level of instruction to which ELL-SWDs and all of our students are entitled. Accountable talk, "turn and talk", and public speaking are the norm and not the exception in our classes. Our grading system is an outcomes-based/mastery based system in which Bloom's taxonomy creates the roadmap for rigor and high performance. Our ENL students consistently perform at a level equal to or beyond their English-speaking peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Math and other content teachers pair up ENL students with their mainstream peers who have demonstrated strengths in that subject area. Teachers provide detailed and specific glossaries, word walls, and vocabulary for both their ENL and other students. Teachers direct the ENL students to a variety of online support sites. Teachers make themselves available on a daily basis before school, after school, and during lunch. All students have access to faculty and counselors through their own unique e-mail account through Google and our NQCHS domain. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 7  This year we will continue to improve targeted Common Core writing interventions, in addition to targeting learning gaps for long-term ENL students. We will assign specific MOSL teacher teams the task of monitoring and reporting on our ENL students in all phases of their academic and social development. We will be specifically targeting our students who came to us last year and have more than ten years of ESL services. The goal for this student for this year will be to identify key gaps in their learning process and provide enhanced support to the student, to their parents, and to the teachers who work with them. In spite of ten years in prior ESL programs the student is still at an intermediate level. If deemed appropriate and necessary the Language Acquisition Team (which includes an Urdu speaking counselor) may recommend more intensive evaluations and will seek to apply the most appropriate interventions. It is the goal of NQCHS to exhaust every resource to address the needs of this particular student. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs and/or services will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students including ENLs are afforded access to all school programs at NQCHS. Parents of ENL students are equally afforded equal access. All ENL students are offered the opportunity for Regents Prep after school and parents are informed of these personally by the ENL teacher, community liaison, and classroom teachers. The ENL teacher is perfectly bilingual in Spanish and English and there is a counselor on staff who speaks Urdu. In previous years we have used several French-speaking staff members for our French-speaking ENL students. We also have two staff members who speak a number of Asian languages. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All ENL students have access to all aspect of technology available at NQCHS. Each ENL student has their own NQCHS e-mail address and access to laptops, desktops, cells, etc. NQCHS is a participant in the NYCDOE BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) Initiative. NQCHS is also an active participant in the Digital Ready Initiative sponsored by the NYCDOE Office of Post-Secondary Readiness. NQCHS uses the Google platform to communicate, share assignments, collect and grade assignments, and provide feedback on student progress. ENL students use the Google Platform tools to track and monitor their progress, particularly in improving their writing skills. This year we have incorporated the use of Thinkcerca, an online platform to improve argument writing for students, including ENL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Based on the size of and linguistic and cultural history of our ENL population at NQCHS we have found the need for home language support to become increasingly less necessary. Students are provided with online access to translators, dictionaries, encyclopedias, and other academic learning sites in their home language. Traditionally the ENL students at NQCHS are Expanding, Transitioning or Commanding students who have demonstrated little interest or need in home language support, but NQCHS provides ample access, nonetheless. As mentioned previously, we have most, if not all the NQCHS home languages covered by our professional multi-lingual staff of teachers and counselors. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. NQCHS is an NYCDOE Transfer High School now in its eleventh year of operation. The teaching faculty, CBO counselors, and school leadership bring considerable experience and expertise in supporting our ENL students who range in ages from 16 to 21. Staff from the NYCDOE work in a seamless partnership with staff from SCO Family of Services (CBO), to provide needed services and supports for our ENL students and prepare them for college and career. The school's leadership team, school guidance counselor and CBO counselors work very closely with the Language Acquisition Team to make sure each ENL student is supported in every aspect of their life at NQCHS. NQCHS adheres to all NYCDOE policies and New York State Part 154 guidelines. The Language Acquisition Team maintains clear and constant communication with district level and city-wide personnel and participates in all policy and pedagogical updates. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? North Queens Community High School is not co-located. 8  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All new ENL students meet with the various members of the Language Acquisition Team. The ENL teacher is available during the intake and orientation process for both the student and family. A new ENL student is always matched up with a peer or two in the building to ease their adjustment to our small learning community. The ENL students' CBO Advocate Counselors reach out to the families within the first week to make sure that the orientation and acclimation process is proceeding in a manner conducive to the students' well-being. Traditionally our ENL students adjust quite quickly and quite seamlessly into our learning community as by definition it is never their first experience of life in an American High School. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is the only language currently offered to all students at NQCHS. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The current ENL teacher has a completed Masters in TESOL. The ENL teacher participates in all Professional Development opportunities offered on the school site which includes an ongoing emphasis on collaborative planning, instruction, and assessment, as well as application and review of the Common Core Learning Standards with respect to the performance of our ENL students. The Guidance Counselor participates regularly in monthly district and network convened professional development sessions. Subject area teacher participates in in-school as well as external professional development sessions designed to improve their instruction to ENL students. Our school is a small transfer school unlike a traditional high school and has an itinerant psychologist and speech provider. These providers receive regular and on-going professional development session from the district and network providers. All teachers participate in weekly organized Professional Development sessions with an emphasis on the areas of the Common Core Learning Standards, mastery-based grading, Bloom's Taxonomy, developing rigorous curricula, formative and summative assessment practices and other topics that directly impact on the instruction of ENL students. The ENL teacher is always present for these Professional Development sessions and provides the teaching and counseling staff with the guidelines needed to provide appropriate supports for ENL students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. N/A Our school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers 9  prescribed by CR Part 80 is dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours is dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Copies of all agendas for professional development and supporting materials are kept on file in the principals office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher, counselors, and school leadership meet formally with ELL parents several times a year on an "as needed" basis and also four times a year as scheduled by the NYCDOE. Because of the small number of ENL students, our parents are invited personally by the staff--literally "in-person" or by telephone or e-mail. As mentioned several times previously in this document NQCHS has staff members who are speakers of Spanish, French, Haitian-Creole, Chinese, and Urdu. These languages cover completely both our past and present ENL student population. Additionally, NQCHS does regular parental outreach every Tuesday afternoon. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Again, our limited number of ENL students allow for one-on-one personal attention, immediate intervention, and specific invitation to review our curriculum, our grading system, and our school policies. We are proud at NQCHS that our relationship with our ENL community is an ongoing conversation that adds to the families' level of comfort and involvement in the school. ENL parents have participated actively in PTA meetings, back to school nights, and all other activities offered by NQCHS over the years. We also provide translation services for parents who are in need. Financial aid workshops, college nights and support for parents with ENL students are provided during special parent nights during the year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Winston McCarthy, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: North Queens Community HS School DBN: 25Q792 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Winston McCarthy Title Principal Janene Pearson Assistant Principal SCO Family of Services Parent Coordinator Esther Nelson ENL/Bilingual Teacher Marylu Guecia Parent Joi Walker Teacher/Subject Area Noah Silverstein Teacher/Subject Area Lew Gitelman Coach Coach Roldye Ceans School Counselor Juan Mendez Ana Vasquez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 9/15/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 25Q792 School Name: North Queens Community High School Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. North Queens Community High School is a transfer school. In general it is never the initial entry point into the NYCDOE for a student attending our school and so much of the required language documentation has been completed at the student's prior school and is transferred to us, including the HLIS. We also have our own intake process and documenation which allows parents to indicate their preferred language of communication and contact. The preferred language of parents at our school are as follows: English Spanish Haitian Creole 3  Mandarin Chinese Bengali Urdu The school mantains a report of languages used by parents and updates this report in response to student population changes. Language preferences of parents are collected from interviews, parent surveys, ats reports, blue cards and phone calls. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish Haitian Creole Korean Chinese Urdu 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. NQCHS regularly sends out notices for parent-teacher meetings, Regents Prpeparation, Calendars, and Newsletters. They are translated on an ongoing basis as needed. 4  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? NQCHS hosts four parent-teacher events per year with the first event (Back To School Family Night) taking place on September 30, 2015. The other three events take place on dates as provided by the NYCDOE calendar. Our staff members who are bilingual are always available and willing to translate for the benefit of our parents. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) NQCHS updates the aforementioned documents on a regular basis. To fulfill parent notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, all communication documents are sent out in both English and Spanish. If documents are needed in other languages and they are available on the DOE website, we print and distribute them to the identified parent(s). We also utilize staff members who speak and write in various languages to help with written 5  notifications. If the written documentation is needed in a language other than what we can facilitate in-house we will solicit the assistance of SCO Family of Services (CBO Partner) and the available resources provided by the DOE. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys on paper and on-line in their home language after every event will be provided to parents with a follow-up telephone call. We will also regularly convene focus groups with parents to gather feedback on quality and availability of services. 6 
