 31R003 School Name: P.S. 003 THE MARGARET GIOIOSA SCHOOL Principal: ELMER MYERS   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Margaret Gioiosa School 31R003 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 353100010003 PK-5 80 South Goff Avenue 718-984-1021 School Number (DBN): 718-984-3628 Fax: Elmer Myers emyers@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Elmer Myers Jennifer Insalaco Natalie Butler Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Debra Donovan Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 31 Vincenza Gallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Bldg A, Room 141 Superintendent’s Office Address: VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5690 Phone Number: 718) 420-5745 Fax: Staten Island Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Moran FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 715 Ocean Terrace, Bldg A Kmoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8367 Phone Number: 718-391-1609 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elmer Myers Jennifer Insalaco Natalie Butler Sandra Mitchell Laura Serpe Nancy Centeno Lisa Augustine-Martino *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Maria Harmon Joseph Fallacaro Bonnie Vicino Denise Buccinni Debra Donovan Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview P.S. 3, a diverse learning community dedicated to guiding learners to exceed academic expectations, and empowering them to make a positive difference in the world. We inspire students to Fly, Soar and Achieve.   School Vision Statement: P.S. 3 envisions a school culture that provides a rigorous curriculum to prepare students for future academic endeavors for college and career readiness as it paves the path for success. Through partnerships and service learning projects, we foster relationships that create a community with positive energy, mutual respect, and enthusiasm for learning. We strive to ensure that all experiences become opportunities for growth and learning for students, staff and parents. School Beliefs If high expectations are set, every student can achieve the highest levels of academic excellence.   All adults are responsible for ensuring that all students excel academically. It is our collective responsibility to work with each and every child to achieve their potential.  All students will develop the competence, critical thinking, social and civic skills to reach their highest  potential in the classroom and in life. It is our collective responsibility to create a safe environment for all students, where we find the right balance in creating a rigorous educational experience and enjoyment for learning so that we create a community of lifelong learners.  Adult beliefs and expectations make the difference in student behavior and performance. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Margaret Gioiosa is an elementary school with 744 students from pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises 1% Black, 14% Hispanic, 77% White, and 7% Asian students. The student body includes 2% English language learners and 19% special education students. Boys account for 52% of the students enrolled and girls account for 48%. The school will adapt and modify School wide reading and writing units of study for our English Language Arts Curricula and GoMath from grades kindergarten to 5, curricula that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Curricula tasks in math integrate instructional shifts by including real world application and the development of appropriate models for solving word problems. Teacher teams meet weekly to discuss methods towards improving instruction and have developed structures including agendas, protocols, team notes, and supplemental materials, to support curricula adjustments. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The school has one Gifted and Talented class on every grade level. The school has between 1-3 Integrated Collaborative Teaching classes on every grade and two Self Contained SWD classes. These two classes include students in grades K-2 and 3-5. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. PS 3 has made significant progress with respect to the NYS assessments for grades 3-5. In English Language Arts, the school progressed from 52.3% Level 3 & 4 students in 2017 to 65.1% of students in 2018. This represents an increase of 12.8%. In Mathematics, the school progressed from 63.8% Level 3 & 4 students in 2017 to 75.6% of students in 2018. This represents an increase of 11.8%. The school also conducts running records for all students 3-4 times per 0  year. Based on the data from running records, the school ended the year with 80% of students reading at or above grade level. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R003 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 791 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 33 33 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 33 19 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 29.0% % Attendance Rate 25.0% % Reduced Lunch 1.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 13.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 78.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.43 0% 2% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 65.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 97% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 106 106 94.2% 4.2% 20.7% 0.1% 7.1% 1.6% 4 4% 10.9 75.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A YES N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. NYS Assessment 2015 2016 2017 2018 Increase English Language Arts 44.1 58 52.3 65.1 21.0 Mathematics 56.3 63.7 63.8 75.6 19.3 PS 3 has been making steady progress toward the goal of having all students performing at or above grade level. Over the past 4 years, the school has been able to move hundreds of students from Level 1 and 2 to Levels 3 and 4. Their are a number of causal factors that have allowed this movement to occur. Here are some of the reasons: English Language Arts The school transitioned from Ready Gen as a curriculum to creating our own curriculum in ELA that is supported by Schoolwide Reading and Writing Units of study. A Balanced literacy approach has been emphasized. As part of this process, the school also created our own word study component. All teachers have received at least 30 hours of professional learning in Orton Gillingham. All teachers are utilizing instruction in guided reading groups to provide more individualized instruction to students. In addition, a reading coach has been assigned to K-2 to provide support to the staff with a focus on guided reading and writing (1 day per week). Mathematics The school has supplemented the Go Math curriculum and integrates the use of Math Exemplar problems in all grades. Teachers have supported one another and grown in their understanding of the math content and pedagogy. Classes for grades 4 & 5 are departmentalized and teachers are able to focus their efforts on teaching math and science. Part 2 – Annual Goal 3  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will develop and implement clear learning progressions for the main tasks for each unit in writing. Students will utilize the learning progressions to both self and peer assess their work. Grade 4 and 5 Math teachers will also complete learning progressions for priority Math tasks. This work will include models of student work of the task along with the accompanying success criteria. In February, the writing units from the first half of the school year will be collected and reviewed. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development times will be dedicated on Mondays in cycles to allow teacher impact teams the time to develop the tasks and associated learning progressions and success criteria. All teachers All Year Administration, Grade leaders, all teachers Support materials and resources will be provided to support the work. All Sept-Dec AP's Teachers will continue to share materials within the grade and vertically by uploading documents and models to Dropbox. Materials will also be shared and presented during vertical team meetings teachers All Teachers All Year Teachers All Teachers All Year Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed through Open School Nights, Parent workshops, Parent Engagement and PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School will utilize professional development days on Mondays, Tuesdays and full days to allow teachers to continue to develop tasks and curricula that are aligned to NYS Learning Standards. TL and school funds will be utilized to purchase materials. Per Diem and Per Session funding may be used to create time for teachers to be able to come together and complete the work. 1. Teachers will meet in grade-level impact teams to develop consistent tasks and curricula across the grade 2. Teachers will meet during common planning,vertical teams to develop curriculum and student task aligned to CCLS. 3. Models for students will be uploaded to dropbox. 4. Time during Mondays and full day professional development will be utilized to support the work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A 5  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administration will consistently meet with specific grades and grade leaders to monitor the progress, make adjustments and to support the work. The learning progressions for each unit will be reviewed and assessed at the end of the unit. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The implementation of the learning progressions, tasks and success criteria will be included during the observation protocols that the school currently utilizes. The learning progressions will be included in the school's dropbox along with the curriculum maps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School leaders and staff are beginning to develop regular systems to provide families with consistent feedback about their children and communicate the school’s expectations to students regarding their learning. Impact Parents and students do not yet have clear understanding of school expectations. The lack of consistent communication to students limits their understanding of what is expected of them in order to be prepared for the next level. The school has begun the implementation of PBIS in the 2015-2016 school year. All grades and all classes participated in the implementation. The implementation has had some success. All staff are now focused on looking for positive behaviors that students are exhibiting. All staff are now communicating with the same language for behavioral issues. While the total number of incidents have not significantly declined, the number of students engaged in incidents has been limited to 5% of the student population. Supporting Evidence ● The school has implemented many systems to communicate with families about their children’s progress. The use of progress reports, several text-messaging systems, and a school web site provide information relative to student progress. Additionally, during parent engagement time, staff members conduct grade level workshops. However, minimal parent attendance, and the scheduling of the workshops, precludes the information from being shared with a larger audience. Students are unclear about specific academic expectations needed for the next grade level or middle school. For example, when asked how they knew they were ready for the next grade level or middle school and what was expected of them, one student responded, “You have to read a lot of books and write responses.” Another student stated, “You have to write open response questions.” However, other student responses included, “online reading”, “summer reading” and “doing math work”. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 7  In September of 2018, classroom teachers will successfully implement Sanford Harmony social emotional learning curricula to successfully build healthy relationships with others. PBIS will be integrated with Sanford Harmony and all guidance supports will be coordinated. Success will be defined as having one "meet up" per week and all students to be actively included in a "buddy pair". 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). PBIS team will meet monthly to track PBIS progress. PBIS team will revise the PBIS program to meet the students needs and improve student behavior. PBIS team will have monthly assemblies and student rewards bi-weekly and monthly to support PBIS School Safety team will meet monthly to track and Review ORRS to track the reduction. School safety team will meet monthly with the PBIS team to revise and track student progress Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? students Sept-June Teachers and Administration students Sept-June Teachers and AP's Monthly student and Parent meetings to promote PBIS. Monthly student incentives for achieving PBIS framework. students Sept-June Teachers, Parents and Administration Parent workshops are offered monthly after-school, during Parent Engagement, and in the evening; updates are provided during monthly PTA meetings; parent events are also held during the school day to showcase PBIS program. Parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed through Open School Nights, Parent workshops, Parent Engagement and PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy and the schools general fund will be utilized to support the implementation of our PBIS system. Money will be utilized to allow teachers on the PBIS committee to meet, plan and implement the program. General school funds will be utilized for student rewards as part of the program. Tax Levy and other funding (School Funds will support on going assemblies and rewards for students and teachers. Teachers will meet monthy during other Professional time and after school to plan, revise and track student progress. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 9  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. On going parent and teacher meetings to share ideas and goals about the PBIS system. Once a month SLT meetings. PBIS Team meeting twice a month will meet to assure track student progress. 1. Teachers will meet in grade-level common-planning teams to track student progress utilizing the PBIS program Rubric. Teachers will track the increase in ORRS to assess the PBIS Program. 2. Teachers will meet in grade-level common-planning teams to develop consistent trends across the grade (in lessons) that stem from the PBIS, Positive Behavioral system. A mid year evaluation/assessment will be used to assess the increase in ORRS and student Behavior. The team /teachers will assess students during respect for all week and during PBIS lessons. PBIS Team and School Safety Team meet monthly to track the increase in ORRS and evaluate student progress. 3. PBIS Team will meet twice to three times a month on Tuesdays and after school to share ideas and track the progress of student behavior using the PBIS SOAR Program. Team will develop lessons and assessments to track student progress in behavior. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The PBIS team will meet periodically to plan and review progress. PBIS team track progress by the SOAR Rubric and checklist of which students have received awards for the SOAR store. Teachers track student progress in class through the number of SOAR tickets given to a class. PBIS team will meet twice a month with teachers to assess and track student progress. After assessing the team will revise the PBIS team to increase student behavior. The number and level of OORS reports will be used as a proxy to measure the success of PBIS and Sanford Harmony. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams are in the process of engaging in structured, inquiry based professional collaborations using student data and work products. Impact Professional collaborations are in the beginning stages of inquiry resulting in minimal progress towards meeting goals for student groups and building teachers’ instructional capacity in understanding and using data and student work products to support student achievement. Supporting Evidence ● Teacher teams meet weekly to discuss methods towards improving instruction and have developed structures including agendas, protocols, team notes, and supplemental materials, to support curricula adjustments. According to the notes, teachers used their team meetings to revise the pacing of unit plans. In addition, kindergarten teachers integrated learning targets, which is part of the school’s instructional focus. Teacher team will develop ELA performance task aligned to CCLS and School Wide . Teacher teams will develop math performance task and journaling writing aligned with GO Math. ●During an interview, teachers focused on pre- and post-assessment data to determine what skills to include in upcoming units. For example, during a review of student work and data, a teacher noticed 17 Level 1 students who were not able to compose a proper sentence and therefore incorporated the 5W strategy to support them. However, evidence of students’ progress in using the 5W strategy was not evident, thus precluding further adjustments to both setting goals and adjusting instruction. While grade level team minutes indicate discussions around curricula adjustments, there was limited evidence of how this information is used to set and monitor student progress towards meeting instructional goals. ●During an observation of a team meeting, teachers reviewed student work and shared strategies with each other. Shared strategies included acronyms, using a Four Square model, looking at peer samples and using index cards. This meeting, which determined a need for students, is not yet a consistent practice as evidenced in yearlong team minutes. Practices have included curriculum revisions yet no clear goal setting for groups of students or progress monitoring during teacher team time. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 1  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. For the 2018-2019 school year, all teachers will be on grade level and vertical teams. Teachers will engage in a process of identifying academic challenges and developing pathways of professional learning to provide solutions for the academic challenges. That information will be shared with vertical teams and this process will be continued for all challenges. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grades K-5 are implementing guided reading program that will be tracked throughout the year from Formative assessments. Grades will develop perfomance task aligned to CCLS and School Wide. Grades and vertical teams will also work to ensure the alignment of rubrics, learning progressions and success criteria. Data Team monthly meeting and professional development will be implemented throughout the year to develop reading, writing and math strategies . Professional development will focus on conferencing, Performance Task and journaling writing in Math. Schools Schedula (Pupil Path), Progress reports, STARS and ongoing communication during parent engagement will promote teacher-parent collaboration. School will have Parent workshops on Schedula, Stars and curriculum. Workshops will be designed to meet the parents needs. Ongoing communication through the school website and Leadership team will support the parents needs and concern as about CCLS,Testing and curriculum. All teachers will be included in specific vertical teams to meet on multiple Mondays throughout the year with the specific intent on reviewing student work with the lens of looking at vertical alignment, use of rubrics and coverage of standards. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students Sept-June Teachers and Administration Teachers Sept-June Teachers and AP's Teachers and Parents Sept-June Teachers, parents and Administration Teachers and Admin All year Teachers, AP's, Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed through Open School Nights, Parent workshops, Parent Engagement and PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time will be utilized from the Monday and Tuesday professional development sessions to allow teachers to meet both vertically and on grade level. A small amount of funding will be used to support professional materials for staff members. Through Tax Levy money professional development books and Per- session will be used to support Professional Development. Progress will be monitored through monthly vertical team and study group meetings. 3  Professional develop teacher books will be purchased for study groups on Guided Reading, Math Strategies, Wring and Rubrics. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will meet in grade-level common-planning teams to develop consistent curriculum and strategies across the grade (in lesson and assessments) that stem from the NYSED testing, TCWRP, writing on demands, Math Journals and Common Core Standards . Teacher teams/vertical teams will meet monthly to develop CCLS units of study, Guided reading strategies, writing assessments and math strategies/Journal entries to improve student progress. Mid-point benchmarks will be assessed in February. Teams will assess performance task, Reading Levels and results from simulation test to see the trends within the school across all grades. After evaluating the trends teachers will revise curriculum,strategies,CCLS units and performance task. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Principal's cabinet will meet regularly to review progress, utilizing the professional development plan, agendas of grade level groups and minutes of grade level teams. Through Data inquiry administration and teachers will analyze assessments, Reading levels, Performance Task to track student progress. Mid-point benchmarks and end of the year benchmarks will be assessed in February and June . Inquiry Teams and administration (cabinet Team) will assess performance task, Reading Levels and results from simulation test to see the trends within the school across all grades. After evaluating the trends teachers will revise curriculum,strategies,CCLS units and performance task Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. PS 3 has implemented an effort to integrate Orton Gillingham methodology into our word study component of the literacy block for grades K-3. As part of this effort, all teachers on these grades have received 30 hours of professional development from Orton Gillingham certified instructors. The next step is to have some of the teachers attain the next level of certification and instruction in an additional 30 hours of instruction in order to better support those students who are not being successful when instructed at the whole class level. Along with other changes to our ELA instruction, this professional learning has resulted in teachers reporting that they have more understanding of how students learn to read and what instructional moves need to occur when students are struggling with learning to read. This knowledge has assisted with the movement to having 80% of all students reading at or above grade level (Based on June TCWRP running records). This school year, all teachers final MOTP was either effective or highly effective. However, there were observations that had individual components rated as Developing. Through the post observation conferencing with teachers, the need to have more training on the Danielson Components and specifically the attainment of effective and highly effective became obvious. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By December 2018, school leaders in collaboration with the school's professional development team will develop professional development structures that will support the improved efficacy of teachers in the following categories: Sanford Harmony, Orton Gillingham instruction and Understanding of the Danielson components, specifically as to the requirements of effective and highly effective. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Additional outside Professional Development will be sought and provided for teachers in the Orton Gillingham methodology. Teachers Sept-June Teachers Professional Development modules in all of the Danielson components will be created and provided to staff throughout the school year. N/A N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teachers Sept-June Teachers Administration Administrations N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed through Open School Nights, Parent workshops, Parent Engagement and PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will be identified to support additional professional development in the Orton Gillingham methodology for reading instruction. Funds may support the hiring of outside PD experts, use of per diem funding to free up teachers or per session funding to allow teachers to further develop their understanding. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A 21st Century Grant SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The administration will meet and evaluate progress of each grade level team on a monthly basis. Each administrator is assigned specific grades that they will supervise the progress throughout the school year. Progress will be evaluated monthly and at the mid-year point. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school's PD committee and the Principal cabinet will meet regularly to review progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school will develop with parents more opportunities for parents to be partners in the education of their children as measured by the number of additional opportunities and the number of parents that participate in those opportunities. Overwhelming parent support is experienced at Parent Teacher Conferences, Student performances, PTA fundraising events, School Carnival and other celebratory events. A subset of parents of students that have struggled at times are more difficult to get involved regularly at school events and have participated less often. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our Parent Teacher Association, along with the of the Parent Coordinator, will help communicate and educate our school community on trending situations, such as depression, anxiety, bullying, and addiction, that have impacted our students, faculty and community. We will facilitate help, guidance and instruction with guest speakers at our monthly meetings and can set up additional workshops if required. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent workshops are offered monthly after-school, during Parent Engagement, and in the evening; updates are provided during monthly PTA meetings; parent events are also held during the school day to showcase student work, enrichment programs, and philanthropy efforts. Parents are invited to attend frequent arts showcase performances and gallery exhibits. Our school website provides links to information regarding the changing CCLS learning standards, curriculum alignments and distribution of school wide information Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents sept-June Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administration Parents, teachers Teachers, Parents Sept-June Sept-June Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administration Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administration Schedule the parent activities for the school year Parents October Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parents will be informed through Open School Nights, Parent workshops, Parent Engagement and PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will create additional opportunities for parents to participate in the school. This will include supporting literacy initiatives including the renovation of the Library. Both Tax Levy and PTA funds will be utilized to support the library. Other parent opportunities are being planned. PTA funds will be utilized to support evening events by parents and Parent Coordinator funding will supplement daytime events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly SLT meetings and parent meetings will meet to review progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The number and participation rate for workshops will be evaluated in January and June. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Assessments State Scores Mathematics Assessments State Scores Formative assessments Formative assessments Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) PPT/RTI meetings Counseling; Conflict Resolution Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Interactive Writing; Ward Reading Program; Computer-based Phonics; Skill-Based Support Services Interactive Math; Manipulatives; Skill-Based Support Services Skill-Based Support Services Skill-Based Support Services Pull out in small group; Push in one- to-one within the whole class During the school day Pull out in small group; Push in one- to-one within the whole class Pull out in small group; Push in one- to-one within the whole class Pull out in small group; Push in one- to-one within the whole class Pull out in small group; Push in one- to-one within the whole class During the school day During the school day During the school day During the school day 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 10 Students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  We will provide guidance supports as necessary. We will provide students with school supplies that are needed. Counseling services and supports will be provided on a case by case basis. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Our school will provide guidance and supplies for any students identified as STH. Our school received 8,417 for STH. 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers at PS 3 are classified as Highly Qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 5  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 3, The Margaret Gioisa School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 3, The Margaret Gioisa School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 7  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 8  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 3, The Margaret Gioisa School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 9  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 0  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 1  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name THE MARGARET GIOIOSA SCHOOL Borough Staten Island School Number 3 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal ELMER MYERS Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Luz Gonzalez Teacher/Subject Area Rosa Longetti Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth DeSaro Related-Service Provider Cyndi Taibi Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal D. Amtzis, D. Papa-McDonagh Coach N/A School Counselor Pamela Rosenfieled Parent Donna Ciccotto Parent Coordinator Janine Guerrieri Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 817 4 Total number of ELLs 13 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.59%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments and/or curriculum embedded assessments used to guide instructional planning for our ELLs are the following: PS 3 utilizes TCRWP -Spelling Assessments / Running Records and TCRWP Genre Based Assessments Grades 2-5. TCRWP Reading assessments help teachers identify which level of texts students can read independently, they provide an analysis of comprehension, miscues, and fluency. Reading assessments include concepts of print to assess each child's level of understanding, and sometimes misunderstandings of these conventions. In addition, these reading assessments include high frequency words and Letter/Sound identification. Data collected from TCRWP assessments are collected and entered into TCRWP Assessment Pro for analysis. The data helps identify at-risk students (including ELLs) and is used in planning and targeting students for small group instruction and/or intervention during AIS periods and RTI. The data collected also helps us make informed decisions about differentiating instruction for our students, including our ELLs. In addition, other forms of formative assessments include Success Criteria Checklist, Rubrics, exit slips, graphic organizers, quizzes, visual checks such as thumbs up to check for understanding, On-Demand Writing (Writing Continuum), etc. 5  The insights we can gain from formative data such as the TCRWP analysis is the following: Has the student changed levels? What are some possible causes of any decline or plateau in growth? What are some goals for this student? When looking at our ELL data, we have noticed that our ELLs are making progress every year. They are moving up at least one reading level each year. Some of our ELLs are moving two to three reading levels a year. This insight helps us group our ELLs and plan for instruction accordingly. The insight also provides us with the areas of weaknesses of each ELL which in turn helps to set goals. The data also gives us insight on the writing progress of our ELLS and the results are that writing is one of the subjects that our ELLs struggle with the most. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that we have in place to support this effort are school wide teams. These teams meet regularly to discuss and analyze data, make decisions and develop assessment plans accordingly. These teams include but are not limited to data specialists and vertical teacher teams. Also, included in the regular meetings are the ENL teacher, content-area teachers who teach English language learners, school administrators, and other staff. PS3 utilizes formative assessment data to help plan for guided reading groups and AIS services. ELLs being included in this are thoughtfully programmed and placed to provide for optimal collaboration between classroom teacher and ENL teacher. It also helps to ensure that the ELL students are grouped together to facilitate integrated services. The formative assessment data (reading levels) also helps the ENL teacher make informed decisions on programming during the ELA block. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The summative assessments being used at PS3 for baseline, progress and areas of need identification are State exams, NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Spanish LAB-R, and Schoolwide Fundamentals Unit Assessments in Reading and Writing. Chapter/Unit Assessments in Go Math. Also, Beginning, Middle and End of the Year Assessments. The area of most need for our ELLs is Writing. Data that is reviewed include item analysis based upon state scores in ELA and Mathematics. Movement in Teacher's College Assessment Levels between September and June is also analyzed. Students are then reassessed on October 30, January 30, March 30 and June 20. Results are discussed with the inquiry Team to determine new or continued areas of focus. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures that we have in place to address interventions are school wide teams such as the RTI team and Inquiry team. These teams meet regularly to discuss and analyze data, make decisions and develop action plan goals to address interventions. Data that is reviewed include item analysis based upon state scores in ELA and Mathematics. Movement in Teacher's College Assessment Levels between September and June is also analyzed. Target groups of students are then formed. Writing samples are obtained and analyzed during Inquiry Team, Impact Team grade meetings and vertical team meetings. Our AIS/IEP teacher then obtains consent from parents to see these targeted groups 3-4x weekly. She provides intensive interventions and alternative strategies to raise their levels of decoding, comprehension and writing skills. SPIRE training and Orton Gillingham are two of the programs she utilizes. Students are also taught comprehension through the use of music and analyzing song lyrics to teach skills such as author's message, main idea and inferencing skills. Students in grade K-2 are afforded an AIS period within the structure of the day to focus on weaknesses exhibited. This is provided by the classroom teacher. Our school provides opportunities for additional AIS services prior to the start of the school day as well as after school in the areas of ELA and Mathematics dependent upon budget. ELL students are included and welcome to join these groups which are highly multi-sensory and utilize technology. Students are then reassessed on October 30, January 30, March 30 and June 20. Results are discussed with the inquiry Team to determine new or continued areas of focus. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] After reviewing the universal screening data obtained from of our ELLs the RTI team will meet with the classroom teachers to identify instructional grouping, to discuss the methods for implementing the strategy, to identify which strategies to implement and the frequency and duration of the interventions. The RTI team and classroom teachers will monitor progress and set goals for the next universal screening. The team will also list ENL instructional strategies to implement that will 6  improve ELL student performance in the classroom. The RTI process (and team) is used to make all decisions regarding interventions once data has been collected. (See procedures outlined in Question #4 for further explanation on school implementation of RTI and for how assessment data is used within the RTi framework also for assessment data within AIS ) 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments used to guide instruction include but are not limited to NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, NYS ELA, and NYS MATH. The data is analyzed and used to monitor the progress and growth that our ELLs are making in our current ENL Program. In addition, the data will help us make informed decisions for the ENL program.Based on the data,the support for ELLs includes the AIS period within the structure of the day in grades K-2 with the classroom teacher and in grades 3-5 and AIS targeted group with another teacher. Additional support is also provided from the participation in the morning (prior to the school day) and after school AIS programs, specifically tailored to support students who are struggling including our ELLs. The morning and afternoon AIS programs focus on ELA and/or MATH. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures that we have in place to disseminate these findings is the data specialist, the school administrators and the ENL teacher. Dropbox is used to disseminate data finding and program changes to staff. Collaboration between the ELL provider and the Data Specialist is key to making sure ELL students are programmed accordingly in STARS and Skedula. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 3 provides services to English Language Learners through a Freestanding English as a New Language Program in grades K through 5. A fully certified ENL teacher provides the instruction. The teacher provides the instruction five days a week. The program consists of integrated and/or stand-alone services. Students in the Beginner/Entering or Low Intermediate/Emerging levels will receive the mandated minimum of 360 minutes with a combination of ENL integrated and stand-alone services in 50 minute blocks. Students at the Intermediate/Transitioning level will receive the mandated minimum of 180 minutes of stand-alone and/or integrated ENL services per week consisting of 50 minute periods (four times a week). Students at the Advanced/Expanding level will receive the mandated ENL instructional time for 180 minutes of integrated ENL services per week consisting of 50 minute periods (four times a week). In addition, students who reach the Proficient/Commanding level will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL services consisting of 50 minute periods twice a week. Students who receive stand alone services are grouped by grade and within the same proficiency levels. In addition, if needed students can be grouped within two grade spans but within the same proficiency levels. The teacher selects the groups to support the ELLs in the stand alone as per the new CR Part 154.2-3 by looking at their proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 7  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2. To ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency levels, the ENL teacher’s schedule is set up to facilitate the grouping of students first by grade and then by proficiency level. 2.a. Instructional minutes in our Freestanding ENL Program are delivered by a fully certified ENL teacher, the ENL teacher provides the explicit ENL instruction five days a week. Students in the Beginner/Entering or Low Intermediate/Emerging levels will receive the mandated minimum of 360 minutes with a combination of ENL integrated and stand-alone services in 50 minute blocks. Students at the Intermediate/Transitioning level will receive the mandated minimum of 180 minutes of stand-alone and/or integrated ENL services per week consisting of 50 minute periods (four times a week). Students at the Advanced/Expanding level will receive the mandated ENL instructional time for 180 minutes of integrated ENL services per week consisting of 50 minute periods (four times a week). In addition, students who reach the Proficient/Commanding level will receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL services consisting of 50 minute periods twice a week. Students who receive stand alone services are grouped by grade and within the same proficiency levels. In addition, if necessary, students can be grouped within two grade spans but within the same proficiency levels. The teacher selects the groups to support the ELLs in the stand alone as per the new CR Part 154.2-3 by looking at their proficiency levels. The ENL teacher ensures the mandates are met and reports to the assistance principal during monthly ESL meetings. At PS 3, the ENL teacher collaborates with the ELA classroom teacher to help provide ELA instructional minutes during integrated services. In addition, the ENL teacher provides home language arts support to all ELLs by using support materials such as various websites, Google translate, picture clues and bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. In addition, a student's home language is embraced and nurtured through ongoing classroom activities, providing classrooms with student native language literature, and celebrating school-wide diversity. The ENL teacher will also use the buddy system to pair newcomer ELLs with ELLs who speak the same home language as the newcomer but are either more English proficient or at an advance English proficiency. This pairing helps the newcomers in many different ways. In addition, the ENL teacher and ELL students use online translators. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher at PS3 ensures that the ENL instruction reinforces the Common Core Learning Standards of each particular grade level. The ENL teacher also provides ENL services embedded in content area instruction. Content area instruction is delivered by the classroom teacher as well as the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher supports instruction through vocabulary development. Furthermore, content area instruction by the ENL teacher is done with the use of scaffolding strategies. Content area instruction is delivered by using cooperative learning, partner work, differentiation and modeling (think-aloud, all of which foster language development. We use the balanced literacy approach. Also, the workshop model is utilized for instruction in all content area instruction. In ELA instruction, the ENL teacher uses the workshop model for reading and writing. Reading and Writing units are used for teachers to apply in the classroom. Literacy units are taught using a variety of leveled children’s books. Guided reading groups, differentiated group instruction, and partnerships are used throughout content area instruction. When the ENL is providing integrated services in the ELLs classroom, the ENL teacher supports the classroom teachers in all the content areas and specifically targeting the speaking, listening, reading and writing components of a lesson. The classroom teachers as well as the ENL teacher utilize a variety of scaffolding strategies such as; pre-teach vocabulary, graphic organizers, photo libraries and other types of visual aids, think aloud, modeling, think, pair, share and or turn and talk partnerships. In addition, PS3’s teachers have received Orton-Gillingham training and utilize the Orton-Gillingham approach for classroom instruction in Reading and Writing including Word Study. The ENL teacher supports classroom teachers in all the content areas targeting the speaking, listening, reading and writing components of a lesson. The ENL teacher focuses on small group instruction and emphasizes the vocabulary of the content being taught with the use of scaffolding strategies. Mathematics instruction is delivered using the workshop model. The ENL teacher uses manipulatives and focuses on Math terminology and vocabulary to support the understanding of the math instruction for ELLs. The curriculum used for math instruction is GO MATH and it includes games, hands on activities, the use of manipulative materials and assessment portfolios which all aide in supporting ENL instruction. GO Math includes instructional strategies that aide in differentiated instruction 8  and interactive digital resources and instruction. In addition, in order for teachers to further support language development for English language learners, Go Math lessons have ELL language vocabulary support and activities embedded into every lesson. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher also supports the math lessons by using drawing, writing, discussions, and instructional technology to further support ELLs. English language learners benefit from the effective use of a variety of methods and approaches. In order to effectively address the needs of our ELL students, the classroom and ENL teacher also use scaffolding techniques to assist ELLs with Science and Social Studies instruction. The teachers demonstrate activities and strategies through teacher “think aloud” and modeling, and they provide the students with clear language, content, and learning strategy objectives, they tap into prior knowledge and build background, they use visuals and manipulatives, teachers also explicitly teach key vocabulary. In addition, they use cooperative learning methods which further promotes language development through peer interaction. ENL teacher provides differentiated instruction in small group setting.The model used at PS3 is English as a New Language therefore the language of instruction is English.The instructional approaches and methods used to make language comprehensible are the following; clear explanation of tasks using the appropriate speech for students’ proficiency level. Using a variety of techniques used to make content concepts clear including visual aids and using using a variety of question types. Also,to make language comprehensible use scaffolding such as thinking aloud. pre-teach vocabulary, paraphrasing etc.. In addition, clarifying key concepts in first language if possible. The Orton-Gillingham program is used throughout our school not just with our special needs population. Orton-Gillingham supports our ELLs by explicitly teaching the connection between sounds and letters in a way that our ELLS can easily grasp.The program enables teachers to use the "multisensory" approach to teaching reading which is greatly beneficial approach for our ELLS. In addition, Orton(cid:173)-Gillingham’s focus on phonemes and making connections for students between the bases of words is a powerful tool for working in classrooms with ELLS who are at different levels of English proficiency. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language our ENL teacher ensures that the following assessments are administered in their native language if necessary: LAB in Spanish, NYS Math test for grades 3-5 and NYS Social Studies and Science test for grade 4. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. We have no SIFE students, however if we were to receive SIFE students we would address the needs of SIFE students by providing them with RTI and AIS as necessary. We would also differentiate instruction accordingly to help meet the needs of the SIFE student. We would differentiate instruction accordingly by providing sheltered instruction strategies such as visual aids, demonstrations, think aloud, paraphrasing etc. and we would also provide collaborative learning activities within groups. We will also take into consideration that the state-wide standards that we are using with our ELLS may be too advanced for our SIFE students. Therefore, we will differentiate their instruction by adapting standards based lessons in a way that they cover the most important information but is still accessible and age appropriate for the SIFE student. B. Newcomers are immersed in content and literacy experiences within their balanced literacy instruction and additionally supported through ESL. In their first year, ELLS in testing grades do not take the state ELA exam, but are required to take the content area exams. Within the first year, newcomers in testing grades are exposed to the content and structure of the state exams to help them adjust to the demands of the state-testing program. Within regular classroom instruction, students are supported as readers and writers daily. C. For Developing ELLs who have been receiving services for four to six years PS3 provides additional support through RTI and AIS. The ENL and classroom teacher will target instruction using item skill analysis and ELA data. D. For ELLs who have received services for more than six years, often the Pupil Progress Team is involved in examining the individual needs of these students and may schedule more intensive services. Parents are an intricate part of the process, which may sometimes lead to at-risk special education services. E. Many of our ELLs are reaching proficiency/COMMANDING as measured by the NYSESLAT exam. For students who are reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT will also receive ENL services as mandated by the New Part 154-2. In addition, the 9  following testing accommodations are available for ELLS and for former ELLs for up to two school years immediately after they have achieved proficiency on the NYSESLAT: Time Extension (All Exams), Separate Location (All Exams), Bilingual Glossaries (All Exams except Foreign Language), Simultaneous Use of English and Alternative Language Editions (Not Allowed for English Language Arts & Foreign Language Examinations) - For State examinations for which the Department provides written translations, Oral Translation for Lower Incidence Languages (Not allowed for English Language Arts & Foreign Language Examinations)and Writing Responses in the Native Language (Not allowed for English Language Arts Examinations). The SIFE Oral Interview and Questionnaire consists of different sections and benchmarks. These include section on Personal and Language Information and Warm-up Questions, also the benchmarks are as follows: Benchmark 1: Family and Home Background, Benchmark 2: Education History, Benchmark 3: Language and Literacy Practices, Benchmark 4: Other Questions, Benchmark 5: Performance Questions. In addition to the SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire and Guidance, other resources found at the NYSED website are the following: the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener and a Writing Screener, a Frequently Asked Questions document, and a SIFE Identification Flow Chart. Also, included is a resource for instruction called the SIFE ELA Foundational Low Literacy Curriculum. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies that teachers of ELL-SWDs utilize are explicit instructional support such as scaffolding strategies such as: use of graphic organizers, explicit modeling, picture cues, pre-reading vocabulary, paraphrasing to check for comprehension, think aloud, grouping and partnering, etc., and classroom peer assistance. We also provide small group targeted instruction such as AIS. We use the data collected for ELL-SWDs to group accordingly. We also use strategies such as pairing a stronger English speaker to model the language for the less proficient ELL-SWD. We also provide the ELLs-SWDs more time on a task within small groups. In addition, to accelerate English language development our teachers our teachers provide ELL-SWDs of with authentic activities and tasks to relate the significance of the concepts of the specific content area being taught to their personal lives. The grade level materials used in our school, such as Go Math and Schoolwide Reading and Writing programs both include embedded language support within the lesson as well as in the additional resources and materials. In addition, Science and Social Studies units support English language development. To support ELL-SWDs with academic content and language acquisition, comprehensible input strategies are utilized. The grade level materials used are on level reading materials, guided reading materials. Our SPIRE training and Orton Gillingham programs also provide grade-level materials used to support ELL-SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school's ELLs-SWDs are provided instruction in the least restrictive environment by offering our SWDs including ELLs-SWDs a diverse programming including self-contained classrooms as well as co-teaching classrooms. Our hard working school assessment team ensures that students are placed, according to their IEP information including the goals, into the class setting that would best meet their needs. We ensure that we are able to provide our ELLs-SWDs with flexibility through ICT classroom instruction, with licensed general and special education teachers. Furthermore, to ensure that we are providing flexibility and the least restrictive environment, students in self-contained classrooms who display strengths in any given subject and/or subjects will have the opportunity to be mainstreamed in that subject area. To ensure that the ELLs-SWDs attain proficiency the ENL teacher provides the ELLs-SWDs with the mandated services through the integrated model, and/or standalone model, based on NYSESLAT and NYSTIELL scores. In addition, classroom teachers are employed in their particular license of expertise whereby they are able to address the needs of the ELLs-SWDs including English language development. The collaboration of the ENL teacher, related service providers, and classroom teachers will ensure that ELLs-SWDs achieve their IEP goals and progress in attaining English proficiency. In addition, to support ELL-SWDs our school provides scheduling flexibility to students who show marked differences (weaknesses and strengths) in performances in core areas. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At PS 3, we provide intervention for ELLs in ELA, Math and other content areas during the regular school day, in our Morning Programs, Extended Day Programs and in our AIS periods. Classroom, SETTS and ENL teachers work with students in small 0  differentiated groups to provide intervention services and support. Teacher partnerships are formed to address the individual needs of targeted students. Both academic and language needs are addressed and supported through a variety of lessons and activities. ENL and SETTS teachers provide intervention services for students who need additional support in ELA, Mathematics, and in all the content areas. Some of the strategies students work on are decoding, comprehension, critical thinking and expressive language. They also work on vocabulary in the content areas (Science and Social Studies). The intervention provided helps students in language acquisition and language development. To provide math intervention services the ENL, AIS and classroom teachers reinforce basic concepts to teach a combination of skills. Smaller groups allow teachers to explicitly and consistently use hands-on manipulatives, demonstrations, language support and logs so that students get a better understanding of the concepts needed to perform each task. The targeted intervention programs for ELLS include instruction from a designated the AIS teacher. She provides intensive interventions and alternative strategies to raise their levels of decoding, comprehension and writing skills. SPIRE training and Orton Gillingham are two of the programs she utilizes. Students are also taught comprehension through the use of music and analyzing song lyrics to teach skills such as author's message, main idea and inferencing skills. In addition, ELL students in grade K-2 are afforded an AIS period within the structure of the day to focus on weaknesses exhibited. Additional targeted intervention services are provided through morning (prior to the school day) and after school AIS programs. These morning and afternoon AIS programs focus on ELA and/or MATH for our ELLs in the grade 3-5 subgroup. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data of our ELLs, the inquiry team has come to the conclusion that the data shows the most academic difficulties experienced by our ELLS are in the areas of the Reading and Writing modalities of the NYSESLAT. NYS ELA and other school wide reading and writing assessments provide the same insight. Therefore, administration has decided that one of the improvements to be implemented in our school is to provide the Orton-Gillingham Technique training to all ELA teachers, including the ENL teacher as well as Speech providers to address the literacy needs of our students including our ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have never had a bilingual program, but if in the future,if the numbers of our ELLs meet the criteria to open up a bilingual class, we will open up classes as needed. To open up a bilingual class in our school we will need a sufficient numbers of entitled students with the same home language and grade level and we will also need the parents to have chosen a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students share the same opportunities here. All English Language Learners are offered equal access to all school programs by invitation, recommendations, and purposeful request. By looking at the number of ELLS that participate in our school curricular and extracurricular programs, it is evident that ELLs are welcomed, encouraged and involved in all school programs. ELLS are involved in many of our arts programs. They receive music enrichment classes and participate in musical theater and performances several times a year. ELLs also participate in dance and drama. ELLS participate in ballroom dancing and are a part of our dance troupe. They're also involved in our sports programs such as swimming and track. When students are unable to spare the expense of the self sustaining after school, the PTA has reserve funds to assist so all students can participate. In addition to programs offered throughout the school day, our supplemental programs are also offered to our ELLs. These offers include placement into our morning AIS programs as well as our after school AIS programs. In order to ensure that ELLs are participating in all available programs in our school, the ENL teacher reaches out personally by making phone calls to the parents of ELLs to ensure that they are aware of the programs available to their children. In addition, the ENL teacher meets regularly with parents of ELLs.In comparison to other students in our school, the majority of ELLs are attending after school programs and receiving supplemental services. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The ENL teacher utilizes a variety of instructional materials to address the various needs of our ELL population. Materials include Orton-Gillingham materials, Schoolwide Writing and Reading Fundamentals, EngageNY website materials, as well as GOMath. Native language materials used are picture dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, internet websites, picture clues and 1  native language literature. Instructional technology materials include educational websites such as Starfall, Schoolwide Fundamentals ZING, Apple computers and laptops, Smart boards and Prometheus Boards in their classrooms. Content area materials include but are not limited to a leveled library, non fiction and fiction books including units of study such as Author Studies, Poetry, Folktales, Fables and Fairytales, biographies, autobiographies, Time for kids and Science Weekly. Also, Native language literature. Orton Gillingham materials are used in grades K-2 for all ELLs and also in grades 3, 4 and 5 for beginner/entering level ELLs. Schoolwide Writing and Reading Fundamentals is used in grades K-5 for ELLs in all proficiency levels. Go Math is also used in grades K-5 in all proficiency levels. The high incidence language in our school is Spanish and the materials used are technology, dictionaries, bilingual glossaries,all types of visual aids including pictures and the internet. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At PS 3, in our Freestanding ENL model the ENL teacher provides native language support to all ELLs by using support materials such as the internet websites, Google translate, visual aids (pictures, photo library), bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. In addition, a student's native language is embraced and nurtured through ongoing classroom activities, providing classrooms with student native language literature, and celebrating school wide diversity. The ENL teacher will also use the buddy system to pair newcomer ELLs with ELLs who speak the same native language as the newcomer but are either more English proficient or at an advance English proficiency. This pairing helps the newcomers in many different ways. In addition, the ENL teacher and students use online translators. The high incidence language in our school is Spanish and the resources we use are picture dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, internet websites,visual aids such as pictures and native language literature. Home language support is assessed during the initial parental interview as well as during parent orientation meeting. Home language is also assessed by the administration of the Spanish Lab. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher ensures that mandated services appropriately support our ELLs needs by grouping accordingly to meet the needs of our ELLs. The ENL teacher also ensures that resources correspond to the ELLs ages and grade levels. In order to provide effective support to our ELLs, PS3 utilizes materials and instructional resources that are linguistically, age/grade appropriate, and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? To ensure that all of our ELLs needs are met in both our buildings, the ENL teacher’s schedule is set up so that all the mandated minutes are met and are built into her schedule. In addition, school administration ensures that all services and resources are readily available at both buildings to meet the needs of our ELLs. Instructional technology materials include educational websites such as Starfall and Schoolwide Fundamentals ZING for phonics and reading instruction. Ipads, computers and laptops are also used. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school provides opportunities for school tours throughout the school year to parents of all new students including ELLs that request it. This is usually done by the Parent coordinator. The staff involved in helping new ELLs transition at the beginning of the year as well as throughout the school year are as follows: Administration, Parent Coordinator, ENL teacher, classroom teachers to ELLs, Guidance Counselor and Social Workers. Activities to help newcomer ELLs, include the Buddy system in the classroom as well as during lunch. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? NOT APPLICABLE 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NOT APPLICABLE Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? In order to enhance our staff’s instructional practices regarding the ELL students, professional development workshops will be held on professional development days to ensure that ELL strategies are shared with all teachers who work with ELLs. Related services providers, assistant principals and paraprofessionals participate in professional development that is relevant to ELLs. All of our teacher will receive the mandated 15% of professional development hours of ELL training through our staff development, which will be held throughout the school year during designated professional development activities. Our PD sessions include aligning Common Core Standards to the ESL curriculum, focusing on ESL methodologies and best practices. The topics chosen for PD will help classroom teachers address the needs of ELL students in their classrooms. In addition, teachers are invited to request attendance at professional development sessions (for ELLS) offered by the NYC DOE website. The assistant principal and ENL teacher will provide PD to PS3 staff. The tentative dates will be during the PD Monday schedule and also on PD days. Some topics will include ELL identification process, ELL subgroups and their service mandates, effective ELL instruction including methods and strategies, etc.The topics chosen for PD will help classroom teachers address the needs of ELL students in their classrooms. Teachers are provided professional development opportunities through workshops which include training in ESL with Common Core Standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To meet the professional development requirements, as per CR Part 154.2, for our teachers and the ENL teacher, the assistant principal arranges for ESL training workshops. ESL training workshops may be in the school or may be offered through the NYC DOE. The records for ENL/ESL training are kept through copies of agendas and attendance sign-in sheets. PS 3 meets the required 15% ELL specific PD for all teachers by our staff development, which will be held throughout the school year during designated professional development activities. Our PD sessions include aligning Common Core Standards to the ESL curriculum, focusing on ESL methodologies and best practices. The topics chosen for PD will help classroom teachers address the needs of ELL students in their classrooms. In addition, teachers are invited to request attendance at professional development sessions (for ELLS) offered by the NYC DOE website. The assistant principal and ENL teacher will provide PD to PS3 staff. The tentative dates will be during the PD Monday schedule and also on PD days. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 3  Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In order to keep parents well informed of their child’s goals, language development progress, assessment results and language development needs our ENL teacher ensures that parents of ELLs are updated regularly. Aside from the mandated parent orientation meetings and the parent-teacher conferences, she will schedule one to one meetings on Tuesday afternoons, which is our parent engagement time schedule. At these meetings translation and interpretation services are provided. She also calls parents on a regular basis and has phone conferences if the parent is unable to make the in person meetings. The ENL teacher will discuss the program and language development goals with the parents during Parent -Teacher conferences as well as during parent engagement. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Engagement Nights are events in our school where parental involvement and attendance is very high. Other parental involvement events in our school are Parent Orientations for newly arrived ELLS. We also have General Parent Orientation Meetings which are held at the beginning of the school year for all parents including parents of ELLS, during these meetings State standards, assessments, school expectations, general program requirements will be discussed. PS 3 also provides a classroom teacher orientation day as well as opportunities for our student parents to partake in classroom observations during a regular school day. In addition, parental activities include philanthropic projects, Science Fair, Spring festival of The Arts, Book fairs and other school wide events. The ENL teacher along with the Parent Coordinator hold ELL parent workshops to assist ELL parents with navigating our school website and how to navigate the NYC doe website. In addition, the workshop for ELL parents teaches the parents how to access information in their native language and how to access their child's online information such as Pupil Path for grades and progress, etc. Translators are provided through our bilingual school staff as well as through the The Translation and Interpretation Unit. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Elmer Myers, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 3 Margaret Gioiosa School DBN: 31R003 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Elmer Myers Title Principal Danka Amtzis Assistant Principal Janine Guerrieri Parent Coordinator Luz Gonzalez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Donna Ciccotto Parent Rosa Longetti Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth DeSaro Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Pamela Rosenfeld School Counselor Anthony Lodico Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: MARGARET GIOIOSA SCHOOL Superintendent: MR. LODICO DBN: R31003 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No DANKA AMTZIS ASSISTANT PRINCIPAL YES YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess the language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication includes data collected from various sources. First and foremost, parents are interviewd by the ENL teacher and language preferences are immediately gauged. In addition, information is gathered from ATS reports and from the HLIS. Parents also have ample opportunities to state their language preferences in the Emergency Contact Cards and at the ENL Parent Orientation Meeting. Information is also gathered from the parent surveys and parent selection forms. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 7 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral SPANISH 100 SPANISH RUSSIAN 100 RUSSIAN 100 100 SPANISH RUSSIAN 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NONE Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you plan Distributed to to translate? Families The correspondence that comes from the school will be translated by fully licensed bilingual DOE teachers, administrators and paraprofessionals working in the school. THROUGHOUT THE SCHOOL YEAR Samples of the school correspondence to be translated: • a. Report Cards • b. Trip notices • c. Letters from teachers (including curriculum overview and information) • d.. PTA letters • e. School Notices (ex: important dates such as Parent-Teacher Conferences, Parent Orientations, State Testing, etc.) Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The correspondence that comes from the school will be translated by fully licensed bilingual DOE teachers, administrators and paraprofessionals working in the school. In addition, For lower incident languages, the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be 8  For lower incident languages, the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted and translated correspondence will be sent electronically. contacted and translated correspondence will be sent electronically. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school THROUGHOUT THE SCHOOL YEAR plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Interpretation can be done by fully licensed bilingual DOE teachers and can be also be done with the NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit's resources. Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Engagement Nights are events in our school where parental involvement and attendance is very high. Other parental involvement events in our school are Sneak Peeks and Parent Orientations for newly arrived ELLS. We also have Parent Orientation Meetings which are held at the beginning of the school year for all parents including parents of ELLS, during these meetings CCLS, assessments, school expectations, general program requirements will be discussed. PS 3 also provides a classroom teacher orientation day as well as opportunities for our student parents to partake in classroom observations during a regular school day. In addition, the ENL teacher along with the Parent Coordinator hold ELL parent workshops to assist ELL parents with navigating our school website and how to navigate the NYC doe website. In addition, the workshop for ELL parents teaches the parents how to access information in their native language and how to access their child's online information such as grades, progress, etc.. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have fully-licensed bilingual staff on hand to communicate with parents.. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 9  Staff will be provided with the appropriate information to ensure that staff is aware of how to use translation services and the over-the- phone interpretation service, this information will be provided through a variety of distributions such as email notifications, brochures and staff meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) To fulfill parental notification requirements as per Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. • Signs in each of the covered languages will be posted near the primary entrance to school. • Signs will indicate the availability of interpretation services. • Signs will notify parents that copies of translated versions of The Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities are available in the Main Office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Parent Coordinator will gather feedback from the parents through surveys and questionnaires. 0 
