 31R023 School Name: P.S. 023 RICHMONDTOWN Principal: PAUL PROSCIA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 23R 353100010023 Pre-K- 5 School Number (DBN): 31R023 30 Natick Street, Staten Island, New York 10306 718-351-1155 Phone Number: 718-667-4958 Fax: Renee Mazza Rmazza2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Paul Proscia Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Keith Parascandola Nicole Serrano Renee Mazza na na na District Information Geographical District: 31 Vincenza Gallasio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace Staten Island, NY 10301 Superintendent’s Office Address: VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: FSC: 94 718-420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Anthony Lodico Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 52 Chambers Street, NY, NY 10007 ALodico@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-556-8367 Phone Number: 718-556-8375 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Paul Proscia Keith Parascandola Nicole Serrano Renee Mazza Laura Christie Lidia Grassullo *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Assistant Principal/ Chairperson Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gabrielle Grassullo Member/ Teacher Jennifer Vann Andrea Pieters Marie NicoleCarlucci Dawn Feramisco Michelle Dotti Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview At PS 23 our mission is in accordance with our school’s vision, we are dedicated to creating life-long leaders and learners. We feel it is our responsibility to insure that every student has the necessary literacy, mathematical, technological and content area skills, as well as leadership skills to help him/her become active members in the community and 21 st century’s globalized economy. Our mission includes on-going communication between staff,   parents, and students to inform them of students’ progress on the road to reaching higher standards and being prepared, college, career, and life ready individuals. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 23 is located in the heart of the Historic Richmondtown Community in Staten Island, New York. The Richmondtown School is an elementary school, which services grades Pre-Kindergarten to 5. Our population is comprised of 0.37% American Indian or Alaskan Native, 0.18% Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander, 1.1 %, African American, 15.2% Hispanic, 73.44 % White, 8.42 % Asian and 1.28 % Multi-Racial. The student body includes 4.63% English Language Learners (ELL) and 24.56% of our students receive Special Education services. The average attendance rate thus far for the 2017-2018 school year is 94.9%. We currently enroll a little over 545 students Pre-K to Grade 5-5. For the past 54 years since its opening in 1964, our school has been a mainstay in the community. Our dedicated staff has a shared vision that commits us to excellence in inspiring, guiding, and supporting our school community (students, parents, and school staff) to work together to develop and provide quality education. Our goal is to educate all our children to achieve their maximum potential. We recognize and celebrate our unique differences while focusing on the development of academic skills, creativity, responsibility, and citizenship. At PS 23 our mission is in accordance with our school’s vision, we are dedicated to creating life-long leaders and learners. We feel it is our responsibility to insure that every student has the necessary literacy, mathematical, technological and content area skills, as well as leadership skills to help him/her become active members in the community and 21st century’s globalized economy. Our mission includes on-going communication between staff, parents, and students to inform them of students’ progress on the road to reaching higher standards and being prepared, college, career, and life ready individuals. Based on feedback provided at our most recent Principal Performance Reviews during the 2017-2018 school year, our areas of celebration are: 1. Across classes, student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student thinking, partnership, and ownership. 2. Structures are in place to create a positive learning environment and inclusive culture that leads to student success. 3. Teacher teams meet weekly and the teacher leaders have input in planning professional development through a distributive model. During the 2018-2019 school year, our area of focus will be around improving Mathematics instruction and deepening our work with unpacking the Math standards. Our goal is to deepen students’ conceptual knowledge, ability to apply concepts learned, and improve Mathematical vocabulary in an effort to enhance students’ problem solving skills. We continue to use Pearson's Ready Gen. ELA program as a resource within our units of study which are aligned to the learning standards. We will continue this work into the 2018-2019 school year with our school's Instructional Team (comprised of teachers from each grade level, out of classroom representatives, and both Assistant Principal and Principal) and Grade Impact Teams. During the school year, we will continue to use Impact Team protocols to further analyze student work, gauge the effects of instruction through formative assessments, and update and evaluate teacher plans and instructional practice. Instructional adjustments made over the last four school years we will continue to use. Such adjustments include: 0  ● Use of new grading policy to better align report card grades and our school-wide promotional policy to the standards. ● Alignment of unit plans and formative assessment practices across individual grade levels to create grade and school-wide coherence. ● Tracking and building the students’ independent reading time stamina to grade appropriate levels. The grade level independent reading time goals are: - Kindergarten: 10 minutes of independent reading - 1 st grade goal: 20 minutes - 2 nd -5 th grade goal: 30 minutes ● All K-2 classrooms will continue to implement the Orton Gillingham program for the 2018-19 school year. ● Use of leadership notebooks to help students track their own goals and celebrations ● Use of Learning Intentions and Success Criteria to create clarity of instruction ● Use of formative assessments with each unit of study, including descriptive feedback and self and peer assessment processes. ● Use of Impact Team Protocols, such as the Evidence, Analysis, and Action (EAA) protocol to look at student work and instructional practices and recognize patterns and trends. We will then implement adjustments to continually address student misconceptions. In our seventh school year as a Franklin Covey Leader In Me school, we have recently earned the prestigious honor of being named as a nationally accredited Lighthouse School with Academic Distinction; honoring our ability to meet the rigorous lighthouse criteria and show exemplary academic growth or proficiency as measured by the New York State Accountability system. As a Lighthouse school, we serve as a model school for our excellence in implementing practices and systems that allow us to continue to implement and create a school culture that empowers students and all community members to be self-reliant leaders who communicate clearly. As a whole school community, we continue to infuse Dr. Stephen R. Covey’s 7 Habits of Highly Effective People in all academic and non-academic areas. Each month the teachers select and honor a leader and humanitarian of the month. Students who have demonstrated exemplary skills as a leader and humanitarian receive invitations to a monthly breakfast to celebrate them and they receive certificates to memorialize their achievement as good citizens. Our Lighthouse Team comprised of a cross section of all staff members (cluster teachers, service providers, classroom teachers, administrators, and paraprofessionals) meets monthly to discuss our leadership mission and to track the progress of our school in maintaining Lighthouse status. The Lighthouse Team members are responsible for choosing books of the month and planning Virtue of the Month Assemblies. Books of the Month are read and discussed in all classes to connect the Seven Habits and our monthly virtues. We will continue to grow the practice of pairing buddy classrooms up with classes from different grade levels working together to teach and learn about monthly virtues, lessons based on books of the month, lessons about leadership, and spend time self and peer assessing as students track their own learning progression data in their Leadership Notebooks. This will continue students having the opportunity to mentor, be mentored by, and learn from fellow students at varied grade levels. Furthermore, we have a Little Lighthouse Leadership Team that is comprised of a supervising teacher and approximately 50 students in grades 3-5 who apply through our classified application system. We also have a Change for Change student leadership team that coordinates a spare change collection and donation drive school-wide. Students on this team choose which charitable organizations they want to collaborate with and then donate allotted funds back to that organization at a culminating assembly. These student leadership teams continue to empower 1  students and give them voice in developing a strong sense of community. They are the inspiration to our new CEP goal where each class will engage in a philanthropic activity during the school year with a distinguished charity. Student leaders encourage their peers to be leaders and humanitarians both in school and within the community. For the 2018- 2019 school year, all classes will continue to implement the use of Leadership/ data notebooks as a way for students to set goals, reflect, and track their progress. Each school year every class develops a class mission statement to infuse leadership, the 7 Habits, and what they would like to be known for as a whole class into daily classroom expectations. 100% of the staff has been trained in the 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. We will build off our success during the 2017-18 school year by providing more opportunities for all students across all grade levels to be involved in community charitable related activities. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The number of English Language Learners has increase over the past 2 school years from 2% to the current level of 3.85%. As result, we have increased the number of certified ELL teachers from 1 to 2. We infuse Reading Recovery and Orton Gillingham strategies within our ELL instruction to further improve students vocabulary and reading capabilities. Scaffolded instruction is used by incorporating real life objects to help students visualize vocabulary, such as using sea shells and sand to help students see and feel objects that they may find at the beach. Graphic organizers are used to help students organize their information, as well as sentence frames and starters, and charts. ELL instruction, including the number of minutes and type of instruction (push-in, pullout, small group, or 1:1) is provided based on students' proficiency levels. ELL teachers co-teach with classroom teachers (when appropriate) and language objects are embedded into instruction. Currently 25.09% of our students are with IEPs. Over the past four years we have increased the number of ICT classes being offered, lowering the number of students in self contained classes. All K-2 teachers and Special Education teachers are trained in Orton Gillingham, an instructional approach intended primarily for use with people who have difficulty with reading, spelling, and writing, as well as students with Dyslexia. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Based on feedback provided at our most recent Principal Performance Reviews during the 2017-2018 school year, our areas of celebration are: 1. Across classes, student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student thinking, partnership, and ownership. 2. Structures are in place to create a positive learning environment and inclusive culture that leads to student success. 3. Teacher teams meet weekly and the teacher leaders have input in planning professional development through a distributive model. During the 2018-2019 school year, our area of focus will be around improving Mathematics instruction and deepening the work of unpacking the Math standards. Our goal is to deepen students’ conceptual knowledge, ability to apply concepts learned, and improve Mathematical vocabulary in an effort to enhance students’ problem solving skills. We will continue to provide students with descriptive feedback and opportunities for them to self and peer assess their progress and create next steps in learning. We have recently earned the prestigious honor of being a named as a nationally accredited Lighthouse School with Academic Distinction; honoring our ability to meet the rigorous lighthouse criteria and show exemplary academic 2  growth or proficiency as measured by the New York State Accountability system. As a Lighthouse school, we serve as a model school for our excellence in implementing practices and systems that allow us to continue to implement and create a school culture that empowers students and all community members to be self-reliant leaders who communicate clearly. We continue to improve our already well developed school culture by enhancing our leadership themed environment by expanding opportunities for all students to engage in philanthropic projects around the Richmondtown and Staten Island Community. Our Leader in Me Lighthouse team will continue working in small action teams to monitor and improve the effectiveness of the Leader In Me process within the entire school community to encourage all students to be active Leaders and humanitarians both in school and also within the community. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R023 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 564 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 41 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 35 31 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 37.0% % Attendance Rate 32.8% % Reduced Lunch 4.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 16.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 74.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.03 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 65.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 62 61 94.5% 4.3% 25.4% 1.2% 6.2% 2.0% 2 3% 7.8 70.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our TCRWP reading data collected in June 2018, 70% of our students were independently reading on or above grade level. This is an increase from the 2016- 2017 school year, but the first increase in the last few year, so we need to continue to focus on reading so we do not decline. For the 2018- 2019 school year we will continue to revise and update our ELA curriculum from what we see from our formative assessment data. Our curriculum includes a strong standards based approach to learning, we focus heavily on strategies and skills for increased reading comprehension, we have included more independent reading time to the reading block to improve reading stamina, and have added Leveled Literacy Intervention with a pull-out paraprofessional to target the children not reading on grade level in the upper and lower grades. We have our IEP teacher working on strengthening the skills of upper grade students using the Spire program. Historically ELA is always a lower area for us on the state exams and in order to achieve higher levels on both the NYS ELA & Math exams, we recognize that children need to be reading and comprehending on higher reading levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the number of students reading on or above grade level standard as measured by TCRWP, from 70% in June 2018 to 75% in June 2019. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will meet with parents to review the curriculum for the 2018 - 2019 school year and give an overview of the CCLS, tips for working with their children and strategies for reading success throughout the year. Grade 1 & 2 students who are not reading on grade level will get extra support in small groups, with the Leveled Literacy Intervention program through a pull-out AIS paraprofessional, or their trained classroom teacher, ESL teacher, SETSS provider or ICT special educator. Children in grade 3 - 5 will have academic intervention using the SPIRE program with the centrally funded IEP teacher. Increased independent reading time in every classroom, to build stamina, with a focus on reading comprehension strategies that work, including programs such as fundations, ReadyGen and Wilson to help students meet the CCLS, updated ELA curriculum to include these strategies and an instructional focus with a learning goal of increased independent reading levels for all students in every classroom. Classroom teachers will continue to assess and monitor reading levels using TCRWP’s running records and individual reading conferences. This will help teachers match students up to books Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All parents at PS 23 9/17/18 11/15/18, 3/14/19, 5/14/19 and by appointment throughout the year. All Tuesdays are set aside for parent engagement time also- 9/18/2018 through 6/25/2018 October 2018- January 2019 January -March 2019 March - May 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Grade 1 & 2 students who are reading below grade level- Grdes 3-5 students who are below grade level All students grades K – 5. All classroom teachers will meet with parents and administration will oversee Grade 1 & 2 trained teachers, LLI trained paraprofessionals, SPIRE trained IEP teacher, will implement & Administration will oversee. IEP teacher All classroom teachers will implement & administration will oversee. All students grades K – 5. October 2018 Classroom teachers will implement & 6 on their level to help them reach their fullest potential during independent reading time. January 2019 administration will oversee. March 2019 May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher's will meet with parents in September to review the curriculum, CCLS, Math Standards and set reading goals for the children. They will give strategies to engage each child as a reader and benchmarks for where their children should be reading independently. Benchmark Months: October, January, March, June. Teachers will meet with parents in November and March and review how their children are doing formally. Teachers will reach out to parents on Tuesday afternoons to note academic progress throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Leveled Literacy Intervention ( LLI) Part-time LLI Paraprofessionals Orton Gillingham strategies ELA Curriculum Maps with ReadyGen and CCLS standards infused Rigorous Lesson Plans SPIRE Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Data in accordance with meeting this goal by June 2018 will be collected and reviewed as follows: November 2018 7  February 2019- By February 2019, as a result of increased, focused reading instruction, small group level literacy instruction and increased independent reading time, there will be a 3% increase in independent reading levels, from 60% in June 2018 to 63% in February 2019, as measured by TCRWP assessments. June 2019- By June 2019 as a result of increased, focused reading instruction, small group level literacy instruction and increased independent reading time, there will be a 5% increase in independent reading levels, from 60% in June 2018 to 65% in June 2019, as measured by TCRWP assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TCRWP Running Records Conference Notes and classroom assessments ELA formative assessments developed within each ELA Unit of Study focusing on the skills and standards of each Unit. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? After school wide self- reflection we want our students to develop and learn positive habits and empower students to mentor and guide each other through the development of the Leader in Me at PS 23. Students should take responsibility for their behavior, accept each others differences and not be bystanders for bullying. Our school is a Leader in Me Lighthouse school that strongly believes if students are empowered to take ownership and taught leadership habits they will improve their capacity to learn both socially and academically. In order to be college and career ready all students must learn to be self-confident, independent thinkers and learners who take ownership for themselves and act as problem solvers collaboratively with others. Providing times for students in different classes to collaborate will improve students listening and speaking skills and further develop their higher order thinking skills. A positive learning environment at PS 23 was recognized as an area of strength in the 2017- 2018 PPO, recognizing that our students are respectful, and our school environment is engaging, and inclusive. Another strength we have is a school culture that values student voice and celebrates student achievement, thus promoting positive personal and academic behaviors for all . So in order to continue to add this area as a strength we felt it necessary to focus on expanding this area to have different classes work together to foster new relationships throughout our school. with new and improved strategies for student success in a supportive environment. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of classes will participate in a collaborative leadership environment by working with partner/buddy classrooms to enhance student relationships and further develop the Leader in Me values to enhance a school culture where students continue to feel safe, supported and challenged. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers will find a buddy classroom to work with for the entire 2018- 2019 school year. All K – 5 classes September 5, - 28, 2018 The buddy classrooms will develop a contract of how they will work together, how often they will meet, their desired outcomes of the relationship, what they wish to accomplish and their goals for the year. All K – 5 classes October 1 - 31, 2018 Buddy classrooms will share their plan with the school by posting their plan outside their room. All K – 5 classes November 1 - 30, 2018 Buddy classrooms will meet and work together on their special project. All K – 5 classes By February 2019 each buddy pair will have already met at least two times. All K - 5 classes Buddy classrooms will share their work with the rest of the school and reflect on their year. All K – 5 classes November 2018 - February 2019 February - May 2019 February 2019 June 1 - 21, 2019 Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, administration, Lighthouse Team members Classroom Teachers, paraprofessionals, Lighthouse Team members, Administrators Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, Administrators, Lighthouse Team members Classroom teachers, cluster teachers guidance counselor, Lighthouse Team members, Administration Classroom teachers, administration Classroom & cluster teachers, guidance counselor, Lighthouse Team members, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 0  PS 23 creates buddy classrooms so children cross classroom lines and learn with and support other students in different grades, different backgrounds and with different learning abilities. These children learn and work together and gain a mutual respect for each other. This builds a community of learners and has the children meet new children that they might not necessarily meet. This creates a school environment where children feel safe and supported. Parents will be aware of classroom buddy projects and will see pictures of the classes working together. These activities will be highlighted at PTA meetings each month and on school social media. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will meet and plan for their special buddy projects on Monday's after school. Buddy classrooms can get together at any time during the day to work on their special project time together. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019- By February 2019 100% of all buddy classrooms will have met at least two times to work on their group's plan as evidenced by classroom logs and data notebook graphs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom logs and assessment notebooks will be used to assess progress towards meeting their goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After the first PPO of the 2017- 2018 school year it was determined that teacher collaboration is a school strength but focusing that collaboration for further development of teacher opportunities to work together to plan better mathematics instruction in each classroom is a priority need. All classrooms need to deepen content knowledge of critical areas that relate to algebra. All students must deepen mathematical understanding as it relates to problem solving, ensuring mathematical success for all. Teachers need focused PD aligning best practices as they relate to the Next Generation Learning Standards and the Standards for Mathematical Practice. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 as a result of increased, focused math instruction, A4A instruction, Conquer + Divide training and professional learning, 100% of classroom teachers will align their mathematical practices to the Next Generation Learning Standards and Standards for Mathematical Practices. 2 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will review their math instruction and make changes to better enhance mathematical practice, while aligning to the NGLS and SMP. teachers will work on better ways to teach math and more sound, enhanced pedagological approaches. Teachers will highlight the students with disabilities and ELLs and work with the ENL teachers to coordinate their needs to further their progress. Teachers in Grades 2 - 4 will join Divide + Conquer- an elementary Algebra Cohort to work together to deepen content knowledge of critical areas in grades 2 - 4 that relate to algebra. They will learn, apply and reflect on best pedagogical practices for mathematics and share with their colleagues to create a seamless professional learning opportunity. All classroom teachers September - October 2018 All grade 2 - 4 teachers. Classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, instructional team members, Administration Classroom teachers, instructional team members & administration Classroom teachers, instructional team members and administration 10 days over the course of the school year- 1 day per month September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 All 5th grade teachers will participate in Algebra 4 All training to get their students ready for consistent math learning experiences and to better develop their math content knowledge. Grade 5 teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through collaborative teaching experiences teachers will develop their mathematical pedagogy. Teachers will engage parents in developing their mathematical understanding so they are better able to help and understand what their children are doing in math. Teachers will hold PD for parents to help them with math instruction. PS 23's instructional focus will be centered around better math instruction. Parents will be engaged in mathematical problem solving during PTA meetings, parent nights and parent professional learning. 3  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will attend monthly meetings according to the Divide + Conquer schedule. Teachers will turnkey the information from these monthly meetings to their grade teams. Teachers will meet weekly to discuss and evaluate new curriculum and plans for mathematics instruction. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 100% of classroom teacher teams will share their meeting agendas with administrators and team leaders will share out and discuss with administrators weekly at instructional team meetings. By February 2019 100% of teacher teams will have met and discussed all math instruction from the A4A and D+C meetings. . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Math Unit plans Math formative assessment Math problem solving strategy- POWER-ful problem solving technique State test scores Item Skills Analysis for the 2018 Math exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After the second PPO of the 2017- 2018 school year it was determined that low inference evidence and instructional strategies that align to the specific lesson be added to the observation feedback. Feedback needs to be less open ended and more lesson specific. It was indicated as a strength that all observation data was clear and accurate. All observations were timely and teachers were given suggestions for improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 as a result of increased professional learning, 100% of written feedback to teachers will be highly effective and will include recommendations that include a rationale grounded in Danielson language and specific support/ resources for each recommendation. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Initial Planning Conferences will lay out expectations, goals and professional plans for every teacher. IPC conferences teacher's will be able to lay out their plans for all students including SWD and ELL. Continued professional learning for administrators on how to give better feedback through a book study. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September - October 2018 Teachers, Administration Principal & Assistant Principal Principal & Assistant Principal, JESA Teachers, Administration Administrators October 2018 - February 2019 October 2018- May 2019 October 2018- June 2019 Record and maintain teachers' observations on the Advance system and share out next steps with teachers to help them develop professionally. All teachers & administration Summarize strengths, weaknesses and next steps on google docs and share to calibrate observations. Teachers, Administration End of Year conferences will focus on observation data for the year and what next steps, goals and additional professional learning and needs will be addressed. All Teachers & administration May/ June 2019 Teachers, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will meet with parents once per month at monthly PTA meetings and review and explain all happenings at PS 23 in order to connect parents with what their children do at school. Administration will meet monthly with the school leadership team and explain how their work in observations, instructional team and teacher teams and academic work help the children learn and grow. Parents will be updated 9/24, 10/15, 11/5, 12/3, 1/7, 2/4, 3/4, 4/1, 5/6, 6/3 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  JESA Coaching sessions Observations - formal, informal Advance data Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018 it is expected that 80% of all written feedback to staff be highly effective, as evidenced by Advance observation reports and JESA feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data reports- evaluator MOTP report. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After our school's Leader in Me Leadership Day event our school community saw the many ways PS 23's Change 4 Change and Little Lighthouse Teams get together and give back to the community. From this all teachers felt the need to be involved, as they thought all the students at PS 23 can benefit from giving back to the community. In order to grow this effort and develop more leadership and humanitarian opportunities throughout the school all classrooms will choose an organization to partner with the for the 2018- 2019 school year and will develop a plan for giving. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of classes along with their parents will give back to the community in a way of their choosing. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? In September all classes will develop a plan for giving and who they will partner with. All classroom teachers September 5- 28, 2018 Parents will be notified and asked for participation in this endeavor. All PS 23 families October 1 - 31, 2018 Grade Instructional Team leads will report progress to Administration and share at weekly team meetings. parent letters will go home to all parents upon administrative approval Each class will decide how they will give back to this organization and the organization will be notified of the plan. All students of PS 23 with their teachers November 1 - 30, 2018 Administrators will collect the data on what they will do Classes execute the plan of how they will help their organization. Each class can choose their own means- volunteerism, donation, support- anything philanthropic to create a sense of greater humanitarianism throughout the school. All students & teachers of PS 23. December 3, 2018- June 21, 2019 Teachers and administrators will review the results of the survey together and plan for future sessions 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. - Sundog Theater - Leader in Me- 7 Habits of Highly Successful Families - Fun Run - Eger Nursing Home - March of Dimes Halloween Walk 9  - Bread of Life Food Drive - Muscular Dystrophy Walk -CEC President Michael Riley Cyber Education Parent Presentation -YMCA Counseling Services Parent Presentation -NYPD Too Good For Drugs Parent Presentation - Sanford Harmony - Mobile Crisis Unit - Commons Cafe Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will plan for this activity with their class parents and grade teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 100% of classroom will have already chosen their philanthropic organization, plans and activities will be shared and monitored. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom notes, teacher plans and culminating activity will real results of what was done to help their individual community organization. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) TCRWP data, classroom conference notes, state exams, classroom assessments, rubrics Go Math assessments, class work, lesson checks for understanding Science assessments and class work and participation Social Studies assessments, class work and participation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School behavior, classroom teacher assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Small group instruction, LLI, guided reading, individual conferencing, targeted reading strategy, Wilson, Test Ready reading strategies, Orton Gillingham, SPIRE, readworks.org, SIMH reading volunteers Go Math intervention lessons, small group review, Mathletics, Successmaker technology program, Go Math RTI individual or small group Review of lesson with UDL methodologies using different entry points to ensure learning for all Review of lesson with UDL methodologies using different entry points to ensure learning for all Leader in Me,Sanford harmony Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one to one, through trained paraprofessionals, IEP teacher During the day, RTI period Small group pull out/ push in, individual pull out/push in, At Risk SETSS, During the day, RTI period, computer programs can also be done at home Small group pull out/ push in, individual pull out/push in During the day, RTI period Small group pull out/ push in, individual pull out/push in During the day, RTI period Small group or individual based on counseling need During the school day 1 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Students in temporary housing as of June 2017 is 39 (doubled up) which is 7.52% of the entire school population. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  - at- risk guidance counseling for STH students -title I money for non-title I schools set aside for children who are in need of trip money, books, classroom supplies necessary - Extra supplies have been collected and stored for children who are in need 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $5,036 title I money for non-title I schools... 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 6  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Public School 23, The Richmondtown School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Public School 23, The Richmondtown School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 8  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 9  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Public School 23, The Richmondtown School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 0  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 1  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 3  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name The Richmondtown School Borough Staten Island School Number 23 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Paul Proscia Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Laura Garzaniti, Suzanne Hessi Teacher/Subject Area Brooke Kary Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Kim Macri Superintendent Assistant Principal Renee Mazza Coach School Counselor Parent Kathy McDonald Parent Coordinator Janie Swincicki Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 563 5 Total number of ELLs 34 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.04%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 0 0 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school is currently using TCRWP to assess our students Reading abilities and Go Math to assess their math skills, as well as, ELA and Math State test scores. We are also using Orton Gillingham which is an instructional approach intended primarily for use with students who have difficulty with reading, spelling, and writing associated with dyslexia, as well as, use Wilson assessments. Our classroom teachers have created their own assessments, whether it be from their Success Criteria or from a students Exit Slip using such questions as, "What did I learn? Why did I learn it? and What questions do I still have?" Student's also engage in paired activities or group work. These formative assessments allow the teacher to observe students responses and behavior. For our entering ELL's we assess their understanding by allowing them to draw what they understood. Students assess their own work thru their Leadership Folders. Students keep track of their Reading Levels, content area assessments, and their academic or personal goals. Our ELL's are involved in the process of their own learning and are able to identify their learning goals. This information will not only help students to understand their own target, but will also help our teachers to gear a more individualized program for our ELL's to make further academic gains. 6  Our LLI teacher, as well as, our ENL teachers have integrated the Leveled Literacy Intervention assessments to guide instruction. In addition, to the quantitative assessments mentioned, our school uses qualitative data to assess our ELL's. Teachers work together with our ENL teachers and parents to gather information regarding their academic background, culture and customs, economic background, family and home environment. These insights will allow our teachers to know more about our ELL's to then be able to provide appropriate academic goals. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support this effort, our ENL teachers, begin the school year by running an exam history report on our ELL students. This will provide information about how our ELL's scored on the NYSITELL, LAB-R, NYSESLAT, NYS ELA, Math, and Science exams. Our ENL teachers review this information and disseminate these findings to the classroom teachers. This information is also used during our school leadership meetings in order to analize the progress and identify the trends of our ELL's. Through these discussions we discuss the strengths and weaknesses of our ELL's, which will drive instruction and provide academic goals. Our ENL teachers meet with the staff on Professional Development days to discuss misconception regarding our ELL's, such as: How long does it take to develop academic language versus social language? Will speaking the home language at home or school delay English language aquisition? Does this child need an IEP for an academic disability or for Speech services? Our classroom teachers, Speech teachers, SETTS teacher, ENL teachers, LLI teacher, Reading volunteers, and school administrators, Paul Proscia, Principal, and Renee Mazza A.P., work together to discuss information about our ELL students, their ongoing instructional work and their formative and summative assessment data. Through these discussions, we can review our curriculum to identify what are the current learning gaps of our student and to make specific adjustments to fit the needs of our ELL's, such as, building more oral language skills, explicitly discussing vocabulary and structure, providing more opportunities to practice, providing more visual prompts, making relationships obvious in regards to vocabulary, words and ideas, providing easy to learn instructions, modeling strategies, and monitoring their progress. During our meeting with teachers, school leadership meetings and/or PPT meetings we discuss the current and past academic, socio-economic and cultural background of our ELL's. We try to provide support for all our ELL's before making referrals. Our teachers use data from teacher created assessments, writing rubrics, Go Math, TCWRP to provide for one to one assistance or small group work during class time or during RTI. Orton Gillingham, Wilson, Fundations, and the LLI Reading Program will also be provided to our ELL's based on the information that was gathered and shared. Our teachers have gone to Orton Gillingham training and are using Orton Gillingham, which is an instructional approach intended primarily for use with students who have difficulty with reading, spelling, and writing associated with dyslexia. Teachers are also using Wilson which is a multisensory research based reading and spelling program. We have ongoing communication between teachers, students, and parents to discuss the progress of our ELL's. Our ELL's take part in their learning. They have performed speaking activities in which (with their parents permission) are video taped and are able score their performance using a teacher created, student friendly rubrics. Students also peer and self evaluate their writing pieces. After these assessments, as well as, running records on their reading ability are performed, teachers and students discuss their progress in terms of what they can do and what adjustments the students can make to meet their target. Students begin to understand academic vocabulary related to their work and can better understand the their learning process. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our school make school-level MOSL selections that are aligned with student needs, instructional priorities, and strategic assessment plans. Teachers use TCWRP assessments, Go Math assessments, and teacher created reading comprehension assessments as benchmark assessments. Here at P.S. 23, our classroom teachers, Speech teachers, SETTS teacher, ENL teachers, LLI teacher, Reading volunteers, and school administrators, Paul Proscia, Principal, and Renee Mazza A.P., work together to discuss information about our ELL students, their instructional work and their assessments. Our teachers then use data from NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, TCWRP, LLI Reading Program, Go Math pre-assessments and chapter tests, reading comprehension assessments, as well as, the ELA/Math State exam scores, and our P.S.23 RTI Diagnostic Evaluation of Academic Skills to identify baseline, progress, areas of need and to guide further instruction. From current baseline assessments our ELL's are showing progress, but still need more practice in using and reading academic vocabulary in regards to Math word problems and in reading comprehension. Our ELL's need more instruction on improving their writing skills. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 7  Once the summative data has been gathered, our classroom teachers, SETTS teacher, ENL teachers, LLI teacher, and Speech teachers meet to discuss their assessments and to discuss the areas of need of our ELL's to be able to drive further instruction. In addition, for our ELL's in Special Education, our Planning and Placement Team (PPT) meet to initiate and discuss evaluations; determine eligibility for special education services; develop a child's Individualized Education Program (IEP); or review and/or revise the child's program. In addition, our teachers differentiate instruction by not only using information they have gathered at our ELL professional developments, but also from our Ready Gen Reading program and our Go Math! Mathematics program. These two programs offer valuable information to our teachers on ways to differentiate instruction for our struggling ELL's. Our classroom teachers and administrators collaborate with one another to collect data and monitor progress. By doing so, they have gathered sufficient information to make instructional decisions about our ELL students. In addition, our teachers have ongoing communication throughout the school year, with our ELL students and their parents to better understand their current work, academic background, family background and home life. These discussions will aid teachers in their instructional decisions. The data collected from these assessments geared specific individualized instruction with our ELL selected to the program. Our ENL teacher Laura Garzaniti who has had four years of Reading Recovery experience and who has 30 credits of Orton Gillingham training, has incorporated Reading Recovery and Orton Gillingham strategies with ELLs in small groups. In addition, both our ENL teachers used the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention Program with our first grade ELL's. Our ELL teachers differentiate Reading and Writing instruction by working in small guided reading groups. Our Beginner level students showed progress in their English language development using these strategies which accelerated their progress in Reading and Writing. Our LLI teacher Kristen DePrima, works during the day with a small groups of ELL's ranging from grades 1-2, on their Reading and Writing skills. Our Kindergarten ELL's also work with reading volunteers one period a day for further reading instruction. . 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] For those ELL's who score at the Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning proficiency level on the NYSESLAT or on the NYSITELL, our school provides support services. Our ENL teacher provides information regarding our ELL's current and past academic background (including NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores) home language, socio-economic and behavioral status to classroom teachers.This is vital to discuss, especially when there are SIFE (students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education) students attending their class. In addition, our ENL teachers and parents can request additional support by providing school work and English proficiency scores. As a result, students will receive RTI where our classroom teachers work with our ELL's an extra twenty minutes per day during our RTI period. Through our RTI model, we hope to quickly learn which students are benefiting from our instructional programs. We hope to continue to build more effective instructional programs in individual, small group, or whole class settings. Through these efforts we hope to reduce inappropriate referrals. For newly enrolled students that arrive from a public school within the NYS, but outside of the NYCDOE, our school must obtain a home language identification, NYSITELL/LAB-R or NYSESLAT scores. The data obtained and related documents are placed in te student's cumulative folder and entered into ATS. This request of data is made for any student entering a NYCDOE K-12 school who has been enrolled in a NYS public school with the past two years. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As stated previously, our teachers use data from NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, Teacher's College Assessment,MOSL, ELA/Math State exam scores, and our P.S.23 RTI Diagnostic Evaluation of Academic Skills to identify baseline, progress, areas of need and to guide further instruction. Our incoming Kindergarten students who were administered the NYSITELL mostly fell within the Transitioning level, with some in the Expanding level. We are working closely with our Kindergarten teacher to review curriculum and adjust instruction to fit the needs of our students. After reviewing the RLAT, which is the NYSESLAT History Report for all our ELL's, 17.39% of our students scored Commanding, 52.17% scored Expanding, 26.09% scored Transitioning and one student scored Emerging. Most of our students have shown growth in their NYSESLAT scores each year. Our data shows an area of weakness in the Writing modality across all grades. in addition, we use the ELL Data Analysis Tool. This tool is for active students and can be updated several times a year. It used to focus on the progress towards achieving proficiency for specific subgroups of ELL's. After compiling the RESI, RLAT, and the RNMR reports and inputting this information to be analyzed we were able to see which students scored low in a specific modality, as well as see the modalities that our students scored high. We can also see which students are at risk within their level. This data is will assist us to design effective 8  instructional programs and/or interventions for those students. This will also allow us to tailor to the needs of our at risk populations before reaching a critical level, in a more timely manner and with more targeted interventions. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the end of the school year, our ENL teachers, SETTS, and Speech teachers meet with classroom teachers and school administration during reorganization. We discuss who are our students and careful place students according to their data and social behavior to the best suited class for the following school year. ENL teachers then meet with following grade teachers at the end of the school year and at the beginning of the school to discuss findings of the data, so that they can make adjustments to their program for the school year. These findings assist in planning the appropriate program for our ELL's. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our Freestanding English as a New Language program we provide instruction in English with home language support while focusing attention on English language acquisition. We provide Standalone ENL instruction and Integrated ENL instruction. Standalone instruction is used to develop English Language skills in order to assist them in their core content areas. It is provided by our ENL teachers, Laura Garzaniti and Suzanne Hession. We also provide Integrated ENL instruction to our students to build English language skills through content area instruction. This will also be provided by the content area teacher working along with either our ENL teacher who is dually certified under Common Branch K-6 with a Bilingual Extension and holds an TESOL Certification or our second ENL teacher, Annette Amer, who is holds a K-8 TESOL certification. Our ENL teachers carefully review and list the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores for each of our students in September. Then we group our students according to their grade and English proficiency level. By doing so we can carefully and appropriately plan our instructional groups. At P.S. 23 we ensure that our ELL's are grouped together by grade level within the same class, for ease in planning Standalone and Integrated instruction. Our ENL teacher and classroom teachers of ELL's, meet at the beginning of the school year to plan the best time for Stand-alone instruction and Integrated instruction within our schedules. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We provide the total number of ENL minutes according to the five proficiency levels based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. Students at the Beginner/Entering levels will receive a total of 360 ENL minutes (a minimum of 180 minutes for standalone ENL instruction and a minimum of 180 integrated ENL/ELA instruction). Students in the Low Intermediate/Emerging level will receive a total of 360 ENL minutes (a minimum of 90 minutes for standalone ENL instruction and a minimum of 180 integrated ENL/ELA instruction). Students in the Intermediate/Transitioning level will receive a total of 180 ENL minutes (a minimum of 90 minutes for integrated ENL/ELA). Students in the Advanced/Expanding level will receive a total of 180 minutes of ENL instruction (a minimum of 180 minutes for integrated ENL/ELA or other content area). Last, 9  students in the Proficient/Commanding level will receive a total of 90 minutes (a minimum of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area ). The ELL teachers carefully plan the schedule for all students by meeting with the classroom teachers and discussing the content area instructional periods. Teachers plan which periods they will be working side by side with the ENL teacher and the ELL students. For those students that have flexibility within their instructional minutes, it will be discussed whether the students may need stand alone instruction to review concepts or to make instruction more comprehensible. Lists of ELL's, classrooms, ELL instructional periods will be given to classroom teachers, administration and service providers. Additional copies of the ENL schedule will be provided to administration, as well. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As stated previously, core content-which includes ELA, Math,Science, or Social Studies-as per CR 154, is delivered through integrated ENL. Entering level ELL's receive 180 minutes integrated ENL/ELA, Emerging ELL's receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of either standalone or integrated ENL/ELA (or other content area), Trasitioning ELL's receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and either 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL/ELA, Expanding ELL's receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area; and Commanding ELL's receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA (or other content area). Integrated instruction is delivered by our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti and certified content area teachers in our school. Our mainstream teacher and our ENL teacher plan upcoming lessons by carefully reviewing the Learning Intentions and Success Criteria's. We work together to incorporate a Language Objective within each lesson and discuss the areas that our ELL's may need the most assistance. English is used throughout instruction, but supported with rephrasing and repetition, graphic organizers, charts with enlarged print, sentence frames and prompts, visual aids, realia, and manipulatives. The ENL teacher works with the mainstream teacher to clarify ideas and vocabulary for ELL's and for those students that may need support. The ENL teacher may work in a group with ELL's and students who need additional support. Differentiated Common Core aligned instruction is used throughout our ENL classes and within the mainstream classroom. Our classroom teachers are using the support section for ELLs in the Ready Gen Reading Program to make meaning more comprehensible. Our ENL teacher is using the Go Math reteach resources online to review Math skills with our ELLs. As mentioned previously, our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti is also trained in Reading Recovery and uses Reading Recovery materials and methods to support our ELL's struggling in their Reading and Writing development. Reciprocal Teaching methods are also being introduced within our ENL groups to support improve Reading Comprehension, Reading Fluency, and Listening skills. For our newcomers, teachers are using our RTI period to build phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, and spelling. For students in grades 3-5, there is a strong focus on vocabulary through synonyms, antonyms, homonyms, prefixes, suffixes, idioms, and roots. Smartboards are also used to access resource information for Science and Social Studies. It is also used to access stories online which are viewed by students in enlarged text to provide reading comprehension and reading fluency. The Smartboards are also used to support and reinforce Math skills. Readers Theatre is also used to improve fluency, intonation, reading comprehension. Through small group instruction, students participate in Writers Workshop. Teachers model the writing process and instruct students how to assess their writing through peer conferencing and their writing rubrics. In addition, manipulatives and realia are used to facilitate Science and Math instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? During our ELL Identification Process, we interview the parent and are able to gain some information about the students English Language Proficiency and Native Language Proficiency. Through this interview we can find out what language is primarily spoken at home, what type of academic experience they had prior to our school and if applicable, what language the student can read or write in. As stated previously, our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti is able to translate the HLIS in Spanish and when needed calls the Translation Interpretation Unit to translate the HLIS in other languages. Students who speak Spanish and are eligible for testing based on the HLIS, will take the Spanish LAB. The Spanish LAB is administered to those newly enrolled students whose Home Language Identification Survey indicates Spanish and are identified as ELL's throught the NYSITELL exam scores. The Spanish LAB must be administered within the 10 day testing window. Our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti uses the Spanish LAB scores as a way of driving instruction and to assess native language proficiency, as well as, by 0  using informal observations and anecdotal's of the student. Our newcomers are also evaluated using the Math state exam. Translators work one on one with our newcomers to translate this exam. This gives us an idea how well they perform in their native language, as well. ELL's who may be going through an initial referral evaluation are also evaluated in their first language. This is highly important because the bilingual evaluator can give us important information about their native language proficiency and whether they have been appropriately evaluated. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE At PS23, we do not have any SIFE students in attendance. However, a SIFE student would be welcomed into our school and would be offered an environment that is positive and caring. We would first assess them using the initial ELL Identification process with newly identified ELL's who are in grades 3-9 and who have scored beginner/entering or low intermediate/emerging level of proficiency on the NYSITELL. As stated previously, we would administer the Home Language Identification Survey to parents who are enrolling their child to our school. If there is any indication in Part 2 of the Home Language Survey that the child has had an interruption in their formal schooling we would then administer the NYSED Oral Interview Questionnaire, which collects information about a student’s family and home background, educational history, and literacy practices. It also collects vital information about each student, including age upon arrival, mobility, and years of schooling at the time of identification into a US English language school system. The NYSED Multilingual Literacy SIFE screener (MLS) is administered to the student, which is a tool created to determine the literacy levels of potential students with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) in their home language as well as in English, in order to provide appropriate placement and instruction. A Writing Screener is also administered to the student to identify their basic writing skills. It is available in Arabic, Bengali, Chinese Simplified, Chinese Traditional, English, Haitian Creole, Karen, Maay Maay, Urdu, and Spanish. Once these students have been identified as SIFE, we would have 30 days from initial enrollment to enter their SIFE status in the DOE's data collection system (BNDC) and we would have one year to make any modifications. Let it be noted that once a student scores intermediate/transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT, their SIFE status will be removed. In addition, we may also assess our SIFE using an in-house Literacy and Math assessment using the Translation Department Unit, determine what they know. We would also have a Bilingual support staff available for the student and have them become familiar with the childs native language and culture. The SIFE student would initially receive small group Standalone instruction with children on his or her proficiency level, as well as, differentiated Integrated instruction. There would be at least one student in the class that will speak his or her native language to ease the child into a new system of learning and make the student comfortable and open to learning and sharing their experiences. In addition, we would keep in contact with the parents to discuss the needs of the child, as well as, provide native language support through the purchase of literature in their native language to assist them in their native language skills. All this will be done using our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti to translate in Spanish or using the Translation Department Unit to translate. Teachers at PS23 are well prepared for SIFE students entering the school year. Teachers are going through the mandated 15% of the required professional development hours which will include information about SIFE students. b. Newcomers Newcomers to the ENL program at PS23 will be offered small group Standalone and Integrated ENL instruction. Their placement will be based on their English language proficiency skills, which is based on their NYSITELL scores or NYSESLAT scores. Entering level students will receive a minimum of 180 minutes of Standalone ENL instruction and a minimum of 180 minutes of Integrated ENL instruction. Mainstream teachers and ENL teachers collaborate on Common Core aligned academic instruction. ENL methodology is used in mainstream classrooms. We also plan for one on one tutoring with the child to give the child extra support using our Special Education co-teachers during first period. In addition, as stated previously, we encourage ELL's with a common native language to interact with one another to make tasks more comprehensible. In addition, our ENL teacher and the classroom teachers use Go Math material available in Spanish, as well as, the Scholastic Spanish versions of the Weekly Reader to assist our newcomers. Our classroom teachers also use apps on our ipads to 1  translate instruction for our newcomers. Our ENL teacher, who is also trained in Orton Gillingham and Reading Recovery, utilizes these methods to develop Reading and Writing skills for our newcomers. c./d. Developing and Long Term Students who are Developing or Long Term in the Intermediate/Transitioning level will receive a total of 180 ENL minutes (a minimum of 90 minutes for integrated ENL/ELA). Students who are Developing or Long Term in the Advanced/Expanding level will receive a total of 180 minutes of ENL instruction (a minimum of 180 minutes for integrated ENL/ELA or other content area). For our ELL's receiving 4-6 years of service and our Long Term ELL's, we are introducing more word learning strategies, where we focus on vocabulary, synonyms, antonyms, prefixes, suffixes, and Greek and Latin root words. Classroom teachers and our ESL teachers differentiate instruction in order to meet the needs of the students with 4-6 years of service, as well as, our long term ELL's. Words Their Way instruction is given. Smartboards are used in the classrooms. laptops and computers are used in the classrooms for researching topics, reading practice and grammar practice, and/or math practice. These students are also given more one to one peer tutoring during class time and reinforcement of the skills they learned during the day, during RTI. Students will also monitor their progress using reading goals they have written for themselves and through a self-assessment checklist of their reading strategies. Teachers monitor their students progress through anecdotal records, reading skills/strategies checklists and through reading rubrics. e. Former ELL's up to two years after exiting ELL status Students who score Proficient/Commanding will be provided a total of 90 minutes of ENL integrated instruction in ENL/ELA or other content area. They will also receive academic support through RTI, AIS (if needed), testing accommodations, and continued use of ENL methodologies used in their classrooms. Free after school programs are available to all students, such as Puppetry, Creative Movement and Drama classes. These classes improve fluency, vocabulary development and socialization skills to ELL’s who need continuing transitional support. These students also receive testing accommodations, such as: time extensions, tests administered individually or small groups in a separate location. They may also use bilingual glossaries when taking State examinations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? After carefully examining each students IEP, we can determine the needs of our students. Certain adaptations need to be made for each child and thus by doing so, we can modify their grade level material and present the Common Core aligned curriculum in ways that will make it accessible for our ELL-SWDs. For our ELLs who have been classified as Learning Disabled on their IEPs, we provide oral directions slowly and then have our students repeat the directions. We also provide activity sheets with fewer items and provide immediate feedback. For our ELLs-SWDs who have been classified as Speech Impaired, we incorporate content area material through Readers Theater and/or poetry. In addition, printed material is enlarged, more visuals are provided to illustrate new vocabulary or to help poor readers visualize what they are reading. We carefully scaffold the information in our lessons so that meaning will be more comprehensible. This is acquired through modeling, building on their prior experience, use of visuals, "think alouds", self monitoring, previewing texts before reading and pointing out book structure, such as, titles, captions, bold letters, and charts. Classroom teachers are encouraged to use the "Support for ELLs" section of the Ready Gen Reading Program to support their reading instruction. Our Go Math mathematics program has resources available online to support our ELL-SWD's, such as, reteach material and strategic intervention activities. In addition, material is available in Spanish, as well. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Upon commencing the school year our ENL teacher in collaboration with the classroom teachers and the service providers, carefully map out the schedules of the ELL-SWDs. Our ELL-SWDs are served in the Least Restrictive Environment. Our ENL teacher uses their IEP to ascertain how often she can meet them and which setting would be most suitable for them. We then discuss the best time to meet our students to avoid any scheduling conflicts. In addition, our teachers are consistently working in collaboration with the classroom teachers and service providers to assess the strengths and weaknesses of the ELL-SWDs. Our ENL teacher, meets with teachers several times during the week to discuss the skills that will be taught for the following week, so that she can carefully plan her lessons. The teachers, administrators and service providers review their assessments 2  to see if academic goals are met. Workshops are offered to parents to help them assist their child at home. Professional Development is given to AIS providers, SETTS providers, and mainstream teachers to help our ELL’s to reach academic achievement. In the area of flexible scheduling, general education teachers, related service providers and ENL teachers work together to coordinate subjects, so that students are not missing important subject areas. During this time related service providers and ENL teachers push-in or pull-out students to help support our ELL-SWD's in the content areas. All teachers, service providers, and ENL teachers meet often to ensure that our ELL-SWD's are working towards their goals. All teachers meet to create a curriculum that meets the needs of all our students. Students who have mastered a particular goal will receive enrichment work. Students who require additional assistance will receive intervention strategies to help them meet the standards/instructional goals. Some examples of strategies implemented include ENL methodologies, visual aids, realia, technology, manipulatives, and enlarged print. Throughout the curriculum, formative assessments are used in order to ascertain if students are grasping the material that they are currently learning. Students are involved in their learning and understand that they can all have different ways of mastering the lesson based on the various strategies that are incorporated throughout the lessons. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For our developing and long term SWD ELL's we will continue to use Reading Recovery materials and methods to support them in their Reading and Writing skills. We will also continue to use the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention program. This is a supplementary literacy intervention designed to provide daily, small group instruction for the lowest achieving students at their grade level. It supports learning in reading and writing and expands their knowledge of language, words and how they work. We will still be incorporating Words Their Way which is a word study program which involves a hands on approach to develop phonemic awareness, phonics, spelling and vocabulary. Students will work independently or in small groups to study the patterns and sounds of different letters and words. Pictures are used for emergent readers which facilitates English instruction. In addition, we will be purchasing software that students can use to improve their grammar and reading comprehension to help them make academic gains in the content areas. As stated previously, our teachers received 30 hours of Orton Gillingham training and we will be using this approach with our lower grade students, as well as , our SWD ELL's. In addition, some of our teachers still incorporate Wilson and Fundations in their lessons. We also use Smart Boards, laptops, computers, over heads/Elmo's are used to support ELL’s in ELA, Math and Social Studies. Hands-on activities are also used during content area instruction. Students can have access to bilingual dictionaries and glossaries in order to support content areas. Our computer teacher and some of our teachers use several computer software, such as Readers Quest (Humanities Software), Math Missions (Scholastic), Mighty Math Carnival Countdown (Edmark), and Kid Pix (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt), First Phonics (Sunburst), to build Reading, Writing, Math, and Listening skills. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? During the last few years we are receiving students from various grades who are newcomers. They are students who have had prior schooling in their country and were on or above grade level in literacy and mathematics in their home language. Our action plan is to build their English proficiency levels while still challenging them academically. Thus, we are currently incorporating several reading programs this upcoming year. We will be using Earobics which is a mulitsensory reading intervention for raising academic achievement. It is also an individualized reading instruction aimed at different levels of reading proficiency and provides instruction in students native language and provides support for ELL's in nearly every Earobic lesson. For our developing and long term SWD ELL's we will continue to use Reading Recovery materials and methods to support them in their Reading and Writing skills. We will also be incorporating the Linda Mood Bell program, which focuses on the processing necessary for reading and comprehension. This program strengthens sensory and cognitive functions. We will also continue to use the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention program. This is a supplementary literacy intervention designed to provide daily, small group instruction for the lowest achieving students at their grade level. It supports learning in reading and writing and expands their knowledge of language, words and how they work. We have also been incorporating the Move to Improve program which blends academics and physical activity into educational lessons that are aligned to the NYS PE learning standards and are integrated with the CCLS. Our teachers have received 30 hours of Orton Gillingham training this year and are working together to create lesson plans to be used for their classroom use or in small groups, which will include our ELL's. We are also trying to plan for after school H.W. help for our ELL's who may need extra support. 3  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. After school programs are offered to all our students. ELL’s are afforded equal access to all our programs. Parents may view our school calendar of events through the P.S.23 website, which can be viewed in several languages. Our programs which have included cooking, Leadership Team, art, math games, and puppetry allows students, including our ELL’s to improve Speaking, Listening, Reading, and Writing skills. ELL’s learn to socialize with other students during informal and enjoyable instructional activities. In addition, can attend Math and ELA test prep during the school year. Our ENL teacher is available before school hours to tutor our ELL students, as well. This year we will be eligible for Title iii funding which will allow for more supplemental programs for ELL's after school. We hope to incorporate Homework help, RAZ kids, and/or Readers Theatre for Reading instruction with grades 2-5 and for our first graders use ENL methodologies, with Orton Gillingham. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. For our Entering, Emerging, and long term SWD ELL's we will continue to use the Orton Gillingham approach along with Wilson/Fundation. Our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti, uses Reading Recovery materials and methods to support all our ELL's in their Reading and Writing skills. We will also continue to use the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention program. This is a supplementary literacy intervention designed to provide daily, small group instruction for the lowest achieving students at their grade level. It supports learning in reading and writing and expands their knowledge of language, words and how they work. We will still be incorporating Words Their Way which is a word study program which involves a hands on approach to develop phonemic awareness, phonics, spelling and vocabulary. Students will work independently or in small groups to study the patterns and sounds of different letters and words. Pictures are used for emergent readers which facilitates English instruction. In addition, we will be purchasing software that students can use to improve their grammar and reading comprehension to help them make academic gains in the content areas. Our SETTS teacher utilized the SPIRE program and our Speech teachers incorporate the Visualizing and Verbalizing Program by Linda Mood Bell, as well as, the Story Grammar Marker which assists ELL's to organize and retell stories. Smart Boards, laptops, computers, over heads/Elmo's are used to support ELL’s in ELA, Math and Social Studies. Hands-on activities are also used during content area instruction. Students can have access to bilingual dictionaries and glossaries in order to support content areas. Our computer teacher and some of our teachers use several computer software, such as Readers Quest (Humanities Software), Math Missions (Scholastic), Mighty Math Carnival Countdown (Edmark), and Kid Pix (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt), First Phonics (Sunburst), to build Reading, Writing, Math, and Listening skills. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? During the initial interview with parents upon registration, our ELL teacher discusses the social and academic background of the child's home language. The teacher may ask how long and how often they have attended school, as well as, how they performed in school. These insights may help to assess the proficiency of their home language, as well. Home Language support is provided in the ENL teachers classroom through a Bilingual Language library. We are currently building on our Home Language library to support our ELLs with various languages. We also provide bilingual glossaries to support content area instruction. In addition, our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti, provides home language support in Spanish and our Paraprofessional Sara AlHurani provides home language support in Arabic. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. AIS providers, Speech providers, SETTS providers, Occupational Therapists, our ENL teacher and mainstream teachers all collaborate to provide instruction which corresponds to our ELL’s ages and grade levels. Before the commencement of the school year our related service providers and teachers review important information regarding their ELL's; which may include NYSESLAT/NYSITELL mandated minutes and proficiency levels and/or IEP accommodations and services. Our staff work together in regard to our ELL's, to ensure that they receive all required services and resources during the school year. If additional support is needed, teachers may provide this support by assisting the students on a one to one basis or in groups 4  according to their academic level. In addition, as stated previously, our SETTS teacher utilizes the SPIRE program, which is s an intensive reading intervention for non readers and struggling readers; and our Speech teachers incorporate the Visualizing and Verbalizing Program by Linda Mood Bell, as well as, the Story Grammar Marker which assists ELL's to organize and retell stories. We also provide bilingual glossaries to support content area instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before our students enter our school in Kindergarten our school invites parents to a Parent Orientation. In addition, our ENL teachers, parent coordinator, and/or classroom teachers assist newcomers by touring the building, so that they will recognize important places to go and feel less stress upon entering their new school. Parents will receive our P.S.23 Parent Handbook in their home language. The parent handbook will include a school calendar, schedule, school rules and citywide regulations, lunch information. They will also be given bussing information. Our action plan is to prepare notices in advance to aid those parents before curriculum conferences/PTCs and to inquire if they request a translator for these meetings. In addition, our classroom teachers along with our ENL teachers work together to locate students with the same home language to also provide academic, social and emotional support during the school day and help our ELL's with classroom routines, finding things within the classroom and around the school. For next year we would like to create a Welcome Kit for our ELL's which may include a picture dictionary, flash cards and pencils. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ELL teacher regularly attends District and Central ELL PDs and well as participates in all in school instructional PDs, like Core Collaborative, Leader in Me, Orton Gillingham, and LLI. ENL teacher also provides PD and support to all staff. Administrators are keeping track and encourage all our personnel to attend professional development workshops through the NYC DOE Department of English Language Learners and Student Support. This in turn allows our ENL teacher to use this information to assist our ELL’s in their classrooms and it allows our ENL teacher to turn key information to teachers and service providers who have ELL’s in their classrooms or programs. In addition, our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti is assisting monthly ENL workshops that will be turnkeyed to the staff. In the last few years we have made strides to ensure that our teachers receive a minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by 5  CR Part 80. These may include professional development topics on NYSESLAT, CR Part 154 Requirements for English as a New Language, Special Education and ELL's, language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL's. Our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti will be required to take fifty percent of the professional development hours towards language acquisition in alignment with core area instruction, including best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language content instruction for ELL's. Our ENL teachers, Laura Garzaniti and Suzanne Hession will be required to take fifty percent of the professional development hours towards language acquisition in alignment with core area instruction, including best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language content instruction for ELL's. This school year we would like to continue providing new non-ELL teachers workshops on ELL identification, NYSESLAT testing, scoring, and data to drive instruction., ways to make instruction more comprehensible for our ELL's and using the Translation Unit Dept. to assist them with parent/teacher communication. In addition, we will provide professional development on our helpful websites to assist their students with basic skills in Reading, Listening and Math and differentiated instruction for ELL's These PD's will be given during our Monday Professional Development days and will be provided by our ENL teachers, Laura Garzaniti and Suzanne Hession. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We provide a minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80. These may include professional development topics on language acquisition, NYSESLAT, best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL's. Our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti will be required to take fifty percent of the professional development hours towards language acquisition in alignment with core area instruction, including best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language content instruction for ELL's. Our ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti keeps all professional development agenda's and sign-in sheets in our ELL Compliance Binder. In addition, a letter is also given to each teacher in attendance with the number of PD hours completed and a copy of the letter is placed in their file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teacher in unison with the classroom teacher make an effort to meet with parents who may have concerns or questions at least once a year, either in person or over the phone during our 40 minute block for Parent Engagement on Tuesday afternoons. This is in addition to Parent Teacher Conferences and Initial Parent Orientation meetings. During this time we may discuss their child's language development needs in all content areas, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and classroom assessment results. These meetings are conducted with an interpreter/ translator in the preferred language of the parent. In addition, every school year we invite parents of ELL's to an informational meeting regarding the NYSESLAT. Parents are invited to learn about the NYSESLAT through the use of technology. Parents use laptops and are guided step by step to access NYSESLAT test samplers, as well as, scoring rubrics to understand how the exam assesses and monitors the English Language proficiency progress of our ELL's. Parents are informed once again of their child's NYSESLAT scores and we discuss how the scores will help to inform and drive instruction for the school year. Parents are informed and are demonstrated the types of informational topics presented on the NYSESLAT, which are aligned to the Common Core Standards. Through this demonstration we discuss the importance of exposure to non-fiction texts for our ELL's. In addition, for some parents, they are 6  simultaneously learning the basics of operating a laptop. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our classroom teachers are informed at the end the school year of the ELL students that will be entering their new class for the next school year. They are also reminded to use the HLIS to be aware of the method of communication for the parents of their incoming ELL's. With this information, they are able to use the Translation and Interpretation Unit Dept. to include our parents of ELL's to school wide activities. Many of our school teachers also send out written reminders and deliver phone calls for upcoming events and trips using the assistance from our Spanish speaking ENL teacher, Laura Garzaniti, our Arabic speaking paraprofessional Sara AlHurani, and we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit Dept. to assist us with our Chinese speaking parents and we have been fortunate to receive translation and interpretation assistance from a Chinese speaking parent who assists us during parent teacher conferences, as well as, with last minute event or trip reminders. Through this method of communication we have been successful in involving parents to school trips, carnivals, school family picnics, movie night events, book fairs, and classroom events. In addition, we also use the Remind app which can be translated in 70 languages to inform parents of upcoming events through text messaging. This year we will be providing workshops on different apps they can use to have material translated for parent teacher communication or for home/work use. We will discuss the how the translation unit department can assist us during parent teacher conferences as well. We will also, have a workshop on different websites that will assist their child in reading, listening skills, and in math. We will continue to have NYSESLAT informational workshops for parents, as well. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Paul Proscia, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S.23 School DBN: 31R023 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Paul Proscia Title Principal Renee Mazza Assistant Principal Janie Swincicki Parent Coordinator Laura Garzaniti ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kathy McDonald Parent Brooke Kary/Computers Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Suzanne Hession Other ENL Teacher Kim Macri Other Speech Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 1/1/01 6/15/17 6/15/17 1/1/01 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31 School Name: 023 Superintendent: VincenzaGallas The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) Janie Swincicki Parent Coordinator Laura Susan Garzaniti Hession ENL Teacher ENL Teacher conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes No No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess our schools written translation and oral interpretation needs, our first step is to ensure that all parents complete the HLIS (Home Language Identification Survey) upon enrolling their child into the school. During this time, a formal interview is conducted with the parents to determine the dominant language of the child. We use this opportunity to assess the preferred language of the parents. The ENL teacher may either ask if they speak English or if needed use the Language ID card to identify their spoken language. Parents may require the over-the-phone interpreters via the Translation Unit Department in order to help complete the HLIS interview and to ask important questions regarding their child. In addition, through this interview parents are able to state-in Part 3 of the HLIS- the language they would like to receive written information from the school and in what language they would prefer to communicate orally with school staff. Our school then has 20 days upon enrollment of the student, to enter this information on ATS. We also keep current and appropriate records of the 0  preferred language within our school records and on the students emergency card. We also use this information to provide parents with the appropriate notifications. Our school maintains a current record of the primary languages spoken for each parent in ATS and on the student emergency card. In addition, our ENL teachers, Laura Garzaniti and Susan Hession also guide classroom teachers in reviewing the HLIS forms to identify the preferred language of the parents and of the children. In addition, our school utilizes the RAPL and the RCPL reports to identify the preferred languages of the parents in our school. This will also allow us to disseminate translated notices and to prepare for in person or over the phone parent communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Chinese Any English Russian Spanish 1 4 25 446 0 10 0.21 0.82 5.14 91.77 0 2.06 1 5 23 445 0 10 0.21 1.03 4.73 91.56 0 2.06 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Back to School Night 9/17/18 report card responses 12/17/18, 3/13/19, 6/26/19 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We will either send the letter to the Translation Unit Dept. a month ahead, or use our in house Spanish, Arabic and Chinese translators two weeks before disseminating the letters. Teachers have access to the Translation Unit Departments. email 1  class trips Varies from teacher to teacher) media consent forms 9/25 address to translate their responses before disseminating the report cards. Teachers have access to the Translation Unit Departments, translations email address is used to translate their responses before disseminating the class trip letter or they will use the Chancellors Regulation A-670 translated letter for trip excursions. We translate the P.S.23 handbook in June to be ready for dissemination in Sept. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Tuesday Parent Outreach day Every Tuesday from 2:20-3:10 IEP meetings Varies per student parent teacher conferences and end of year conference 11/15/18, 3/14/19, 5/14/19 interpretation service(s)? For each of our meeting use our in-house interpreters for Spanish and Arabic. We use the Translation Unit Depts. over-the-phone service for Chinese or Russian. For each of our meeting use our in-house interpreters for Spanish and Arabic. We use the Translation Unit Depts. over-the-phone service for Chinese or Russian. For each of our meeting use our in-house interpreters for Spanish and Arabic. We use the Translation Unit Depts. over-the-phone service for Chinese or Russian. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency we would use our in-house interpreters who speak Spanish and Arabic to assist the school to call the parents of our ELL’s to let them know important information regarding the safety of their children and any procedures that will take place as a result of the school emergency. Our Parent Coordinator will use the over-the-phone service via the Translation Unit Dept. to assist us with our Chinese speaking parents. We will also use our Remind text service, which can be read in other languages, as another resource of communication. 2  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our ENL teacher will ensure that the staff members are aware of the goal of the Chancellor’s Regulation A663, which replaced the Chancellor’s Regulations dated November 2, 2007. This regulation establishes the procedures for ensuring that Limited English Speaking parents1 are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. Our staff will be reminded that the Translation and Interpretation Unit within the Office for Family Engagement and Advocacy is responsible for providing language access support to families and parent leaders. In addition, important definitions and terms will be reviewed to our staff; the process of determining the primary language of the parents, relaying our obligation to provide language assistance, translation requirements and interpretation services will also be discussed during these professional development meetings. Our school will ensure that all staff are aware of how to use the translation services and the over-the-phone interpretation service at the beginning of the school year, as well as, before parent teacher conferences. This will be done through ENL professional development hours where our staff will be provided with Translation and Interpretation Brochures, Language ID Guides, Language Palm Cards. Our ENL teacher will send emails to remind staff of these services, at the end of the school year, so that they can plan ahead by reviewing their upcoming students cumulative folders for the Home Language Identification Survey, which states the parents preferred language for oral and written communication. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will provide translation and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance in order to communicate with school staff. We will also provide parents with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. We also ensure that in our primary entrance we post a sign indicating the availability of interpretation services in our most covered languages. We will also inform parents of the availability of covered languages on the DOE website. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will provide a parent survey in their preferred language regarding their feedback on the quality and availability of school notifications at the end of the school year. In this way we will be able to serve our parents better the following school year 3 
