 31R035 School Name: P.S. 35 THE CLOVE VALLEY SCHOOL Principal: MELISSA GAROFALO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 35 353100010035 Kindergarten – Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 31R035 60 Foote Avenue, Staten Island, NY 10301 718-442-3037 Phone Number: 718-815-4855 Fax: Melissa Garofalo Mcassan2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Email Address: Melissa Garofalo Francesca Harris Sabrina Tarbell & Michelle Harrell Jillian Rezza Not applicable Not applicable Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Not applicable Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Anthony Lodico Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace alodico@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-420-5657 Phone Number: 718-420-5677 Fax: Staten Island Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Moran FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 715 Ocean Terrace Kmoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 212-374-4254 Phone Number: 718-556-8375 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melissa Garofalo Francesca Harris Sabrina Tarbell Jillian Rezza Laura Morton Marianne Falcone *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/paraprofessional   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Anne Buyanovsky Kate Rockfeller EmanAboulkhir Maggie Maroz Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The PS 35 community is dedicated to life long learning and deepening our understanding of unpacking the standards to vertically align curriculum in all content areas. Through collaboration, teachers and administration share effective and highly effective practices and support each other. Engaging in Impact Team work, teachers are able to find evidence based strategies to support their students’ individual needs in a healthy and positive school environment.   At P.S. 35R our mission is to insure that all of P.S. 35’s students receive a high quality well-rounded education that serves as a solid foundation for future success. To quote Johanne Wolfgang Von Goeth, “Knowing is not enough; we must apply, willing is not enough; we must do”. Our teachers have an in depth knowledge of the Next Generation Learning Standards and provide our students with the strategies to become assessment capable learners who strive to meet and exceed the standards by applying themselves. We pledge to support our students meet their fullest potential by supporting, encouraging celebrating their individual differences and working together to make their elementary school years the most memorable of their lives. We strive to keep everyone “Happy in the Hive” at P.S. 35R. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Establishing partnerships with families is a top priority for all members of the PS 35R community. We have an open door policy which encourages parents to visit their child's classroom anytime to observe instruction. We open up every school year by continuing the tradition of inviting our students’ families into the classrooms to discuss curriculum and expectations. Last school year, the principal conducted a series of eight workshops on what the common core standards look like across the grades. To support an understanding of the on-going units being implemented in the classrooms, teacher teams develop monthly newsletters to inform parents of the expectations of the units and how they can support their child at home. These newsletters inform parents of dates they can join us to celebrate or work with their child during events such as writing celebrations and Parents-as-Reading and Math partners. Students' Unit Folders are send home at least six times a year. This practice has served as another way to inform families about the individual goals their child is working on and a specific action plan as to how they can help support their child’s progress. Our vision to meet students’ needs in a point-of- service manner provides on-going feedback to students that will insure academic success and high expectations as they move forward in their schooling. All of the aforementioned activities place our children on a trajectory for a college education. PS 35R has a partnership with Staten Island Mental, who provides training our reading volunteers. We have student teachers from St. Joseph College. Our professional development partnership with Core Collaborative provides whole day sessions throughout the school year on targeted PD that aligns to the the school's initiatives. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The concepts of Universal Design for Learning is integrated into our school's curriculum across content areas. Our school, like many others, has barriers which impact student learning. 21% of our population is students with disabilities (50 students in ICT classrooms and 30 students who receive related services including speech and OT). Teams of teachers, along with the principal, frequently meet to refine the curricula and academic tasks using student work and data. K-5 teachers work in teams using common assessments to create a clear picture of student progress toward meeting individual goals. Teachers make strategic decisions based on the student work for next steps such as, 0  but not limited to: whole group instruction (planning questions for all the learners within the class) , small group instruction( scaffolding the learning activity) and/or one-to-one instruction. The School Implementation Team meets once a month to review students' Individual Education Plans to insure quality IEP's are driving all instruction. The implementation of the integrated classroom has had a positive impact on students with disabilities progress. Students within this population require learning activities with multiple entry points to allow them the opportunity to be successful in completing a grade level task. Some of the modifications included are: math manipulatives available for all students during problem solving activities; student choice regarding different types of writing paper in writer’s workshop; students responding to higher order thinking questions in various ways (using a graphic organizer, talking to a partner, writing a response in their reading notebook). These students also require a multi-sensory approach. All students with disabilities are instructed with Orton Gillingham and have accounts for the online program that tracks progress in ELA. PS 35R English Language Learner population comprises 6% of our student population (23 students) only two of these ELLs are identified as transitioning as measured by the NYSITALL or NYSELAT. 21 students are identified as expanding or commanding. These students require 90 minutes of instruction weekly. The ESL teacher uses the integrated classroom model to support all ELL students within the classroom. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. PS 35R has demonstrated progress in three of the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, with minimal decreases in the two of the elements. Collaborative teachers continues to stands out as we scored 4.93, an .28 increase from 2017-2018 on the School Quality Snapshot. I accredit this to the work that begin in the 2014-2015 school year, when we developed a relationship with Core Collaborative Learning. This partnership focused building teacher efficacy through the use of Impact Teams. The work also provided us with a clear understanding how to develop assessment capable learners. During the 2017-2018 school year, we focused on Rigorous Instruction as the teachers delved deeper into purposeful use for protocols used in Impact Team meetings, provided descriptive feedback to students to support them in creating goals, and explored diverse paths for mathematical thinking. The .34 increase on School Quality Snapshot rigorous instruction is evidence of the success we had with with this work the past school year. For the 2018-2019 school year, we will be focusing on strong family community ties as we demonstrated a .23 decrease in this element. An overall 4.48 score is well above the both the city and district average however we expect our scores in all elements to exceed 4.50. This year parents will be formally invited (six times) into their child's classroom for student led conferences focused on student generated goals in ELA. In addition, parents will receive Math unit folders at the beginning of each math unit. Included in the folder will be priority standards within the unit, the grading policy which includes the specific criteria that will be assessed throughout the unit. This folder will re-1  place the math grades on the students progress reports, as parents will see daily the progress the student is making towards meeting the standards and the feedback for next steps. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R035 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 395 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 14 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 38.0% % Attendance Rate 34.9% % Reduced Lunch 3.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 19.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 53.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.25 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 83.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 99% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) Yes Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 34 33 95.0% 3.0% 22.3% 10.4% 12.2% 5.1% 0 0% 6.5 83.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. NYS 2018 Instructional Report Mathematics Data:  Geometry: Grade 3, percentage of point change from 2017 (+19), Grade 4 (+24), and Grade 5 (+18)  Measurement & Data: Grade 3 (+25), Grade 4 (+22), and Grade 5 (+21)  Numbers and Operations in Base Ten: Grade 3 (+17), Grade 4 (+24), and Grade 5 ( +16)  Numbers & Operations-Fractions: Grade 3 (+22), Grade 4 (+21), and Grade 5 (+15)  Operations and Algebraic Thinking: Grade 3 (+17), Grade 4 (+14), and Grade 5 (+16) Eureka Math 2017-2018 Data  Grade 1 End of Module Assessments: o Sums and Differences to 10, 96% scored greater than 80% o Place Value addition and subtraction up to 20, 97% scored greater than 80% o Length and Measurement, 79% scored greater than 80% o Place value addition and subtraction up to 40, 88% scored greater than 80% o Place Value Addition and Subtraction up to 100, 95% scored greater than 80% Identifying, Composing and Partitioning Shapes, 82% scored greater than 80% o  Grade 2 End of Module Assessments: o Sums and differences to 20, 85% scored greater than 80% o Addition and Subtraction of Length Units, 69% scored greater than 80% o Place Value up to 1000, 98% scored greater than 80% o Addition and Subtraction within 200 and word problems to 100, 65% scored greater than 80% o Addition and Subtraction within 1000 and word problems to 100, 76% scored greater than 80% o Foundations of Multiplication and Division, 88% scored greater than 80% o Problem Solving with Length, Money and Data, 69% scored greater than 80% Framework for Great School Report 2017  87% of the school community are familiar with the Common Core Shifts in Mathematics. Strengths: 4   In 2018, we will be launching our new teacher created Math curriculum. Teachers worked during the 2017-2018 school mapping standards, creating units with priority standards, and creating assessments. To prepare for this work, in 2017 we launched the implementation of Math stations. Students worked daily in 30 minute block in station work to meet their individual needs. Teachers planned various stations and engaged students in "pit" problems. This structure supported the teachers in managing an authentic math workshop. The 44 out of 50 kindergarten students have mastered grade 1 standards in addition of numbers 1-20. We accredit this success to the additional 30 minute block of time in addition to the hands on approach to teach mathematics.  95% of teachers are rated Effective and Highly Effective in Component 3c, Engaging Students in Learning  99% of teachers are rated Effective in Component 1e, Designing Coherent Instruction  97% of teachers rated Effective to Highly Effective in Component 3d, Using Assessment in Instruction  100% of teachers have overall MOTP rating of Effective Priority Needs:  Teachers will need support in pacing the units they created to insure they are teaching all the priority standards in additon to choosing the proper resources that align to each priority standard. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, , the percentage of all tested students will demonstrate a 5-7% increase in meeting or exceeding grade level standards in Math as measured by the 2019 NYS Math assessment. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Workshops to Launch New Math Curriculum four sessions parents Aligning math resources (Exemplars, tasks, exit slips, pit problems) to priority standards weekly during administrative periods classroom teachers August 27-29th and September 26,2018 Sept 2018-June2019 Instructional Rounds monthly Algebra for All quarterly Principal Lead teachers, principal, Math consultant All classroom teachers. principal, Math consultant classroom teachers Nov 2018-May 2019 principal, grade 5 teachers August 8th, 2018 other Dates TBA NTN coaches, A4A district support leads Implementation of an 80 minute Math workshop minute daily including: "pit" problems to launch the unit, math Stations focused on using formative assessment to arrange flexible groups: Fluency station, task station, exemplar stations, targeted computer work. classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive Math unit folders at the beginning of each math unit. Included in the folder will be priority standards within the unit, the grading policy which includes the specific criteria that will be assessed throughout the unit. This folder will re-place the math grades on the students progress reports, as parents will see daily the progress the student is making towards meeting the standards and the feedback for next steps. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  Each classroom teacher is given an additional prep period per week, that is devoted to Math professional development. Per session funding is allocated for the principal and teachers in grades 2-5 to 7  meet twice a week to support students who are not mastering grade level standards in Mathematics. FSF was used to purchase Math Exemplar licenses for all classroom teachers to engage students in addition8  al problem solving. FSF was used to purchase math manipulative kits for all teachers. Professional development (Four full days) from NTN, National Training Network, has been secured by District 31 and 9  PS 35R will fund three additional days with FSF. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 85% of students will demonstrate progress as evidenced by task rubrics included in Math unit folders, which are sent home weekly. Progress will be demonstrated by students' movement within the grading system: ME,MA, MT, MP, and MB. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Grade specific multiple criteria including: fluency checks, math tasks, exemplars, math station work and summative assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Fountas and Pinnell 2017-2018 End of Year Data  Kindergarten: o 93% general education (55 out of 58) students are reading at or above grade level o 71% students (5 out of 7) who receive speech services are reading at or above grade level o 100% students (1 out of 1) who receive OT are reading at or above grade level.  Grade 1 o 84% (48 out of 57) studentsFountas are reading at or above grade level o 1% (1 out of 12) ICT students are reading at or above grade level. o 33% (1 out of 3) students who receive speech services are reading at or above grade level.  Grade 2 o 89% (44out of 49) students are reading at or above grade level. o 100% (1 out 1) students who receive speech services are reading at or above grade level. o 50% (1out of 2) students who receive OT are reading at or above grade level.  Grade 3 o 81% (45out of 55) students are reading at or above grade level. o 33% (4 out of 12) ICT students are reading at or above grade level. o 100% (1 out of 1) students who receive speech services are reading at or above grade level. o 50% (1 out of 2) students who receive OT are reading at or above grade level.  Grade 4 o 85% (35 out of 41) students are reading at or above grade level. o 11% (1 out of 9) ICT students are reading at or above grade level.  Grade 5 o 78% (39 out of 50) students are reading at or above grade level. o 45% (5 out of 11) ICT students are reading at or above grade level. Strengths:  Classroom teachers have an in-depth knowledge of the ELA standards due to numerous years of professional development.  Their knowledge was used to create a school-wide ELA curriculum which is aligned to the CCS and vertically aligned across grades.  The implementation of the integrated model for related services over the past two school years has increased our SWD's confidence level to perform the work their general education peers are completing. 1  Priority Needs:  Our ELA curriculum engages students in productive struggles daily. Students need to learn how to be proactive when confronted with something challenging.  To provide all staff members with training on the mood meter, to support students who experience negative behaviors due to frustration with the tasks. For students to learn how to name the behavior and if necessary learn how to tame with effective strategies.  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of all students including students with disabilities will demonstrate mastery of grade level reading standards as evidenced by the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  "Be your Best Self" Identify three qualities when you are at your best. Create life size models to display in classrooms and around the school. "Bottle up these qualities" during the month of September Launching the RULER approach, creating staff, class and parent charters during the month of September Implementation of "Mood Mondays" and "Feelings Friday" in all classroom. Quarterly parent workshops Students, all staff members, parents Students, all staff members, parents Students, classroom teachers Parents The BUZZ, our school newspaper will add a new section entitled: Conflict Corner & Resolution Ready that will include students' experience in both the classroom and out of classroom. BUZZ student reporters Professional development on delving deeper into the behaviors to Notice,Teach, and Support for specifc reading levels. Teachers and paraprofessionals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 9/11 school assembly and throughout the school year September 2018 September 2017-June 2019 9/28, 12/3, 3/4, & 5/17/19 Every Wednesday morning Sept 2018-June 2019 10/1, 11/5, 1/14, 3/5, & 5/6/19 Principal, Principal Principal Principal, Parent Coordinator Principal, BUZZ 5th grade editors Principal, data specialist How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will attend all assemblies. Parents letters will be backpacked home to launch each habit. Parents will receive the BUZZ monthly. Parents will receive students' ELA progress reports four times a year,in addition the students ELA goal folder which goes home six times. 3  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The additional 80 minutes of professional development will be used to get the staff familiar and comfortable with the mood meter. Classroom observations will include guided reading lessons and strategy group lessons in ELA. The 40 minute parent engagement block will be used for parents to meet with teachers to share their child's experiences with the 7 habits at home. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 70% of all students including students with disabilities will reach the grade specific February benchmark as evidenced by Fountas and Pinnell the reading assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2018-2019 Instructional Report for NYS ELA exam:     Standard RL 4.3, percentage of point change from 2017-2018(+14) Standard RL 4.2, percentage of point change from 2017-2018(+22) Standard RL 5.3, percentage of point change from 2017-2018 (+18) Standard RL 5.2, percentage of point change from 2017-2018 (+.09) Strengths: In 2016-2017, PS 35R uploaded success criteria and ELA curriculum maps to our Google Drive   95% of teachers are rated Effective and Highly Effective in Component 3b, Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques  A Gsuite account (mcassan2@PS35clovevalley.com) was created in June 2017.  94% of teachers responded positively to questions about Collaborative teachers; 100% of teachers say they work together to design instructional programs, 100% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school, and 92% of teachers say they fell responsible that all students learn. Priority Needs:  To provide professional development to teachers on Google classroom implementation  To provide a Chrome Book for all students in grades 4 &5.  To prepare our student for the technology demands in middle school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 5  By June 2019, 90 % of students in grades K-5 will demonstrate growth on a Math task as evidenced by the Evidence, Action, Analysis Protocol. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Revisiting Impact Team Protocols weekly Implementation of Grade Impact Teams weekly Pacing 4 cycles of Math Inquiry quarterly Produce a synopsis of effective teaching strategies quarterly 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Teams & Principal Teacher teams & Principal Teacher Teams & Principal Teacher Teams September 2018 Principal Lead Teacher & Principal Lead Teacher Principal October 2018-June 2019 November 2018-June 2019 November 2018- 5/31/19 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops, students' work samples backpacked home with feedback including teacher, self and peer. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Additional prep period is scheduled weekly for grade Impact Team meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 75% of students will have demonstrated progress as evidenced by two completed Inquiry cycles within Mathematics Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The evidence, action, analysis protocol. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After careful analysis of the MOTP report on the Advance website, it was determined that: 54% of teachers were rated effective in domain 4E and 46% were Highly Effective. After careful analysis of the Framework for Great Schools Report 2017 Effective School leadership had significant gains since 2016. It was determined that teacher influence, which we scored 68 in 2015 demonstrated a significant increase to 94 in 2016 and remains consistent in 2017 at 94%, which is significantly greater than the citywide average. On the 2017-2018 MOLP, Quality Review Indicator 1.1/ Curriculum was rated Highly Effective and feedback from the superintendent included: collaboratively, your teacher teams are adjusting and rewriting the curriculum to meet the rigorous demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will meet at least 2 of the learning goals which they created based on the feedback they received on the 2017-2018 MOTP as measured by student tasks. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Evidence Walks quarterly All teachers Videotaping of Highly effective lessons in component 3D quarterly All teachers The principal and team leaders K-5 The principal and team leaders K-5 10/25, 10/26, 11/14, teacher selected dates throughout January and June 2017 Informal observations of grade Impact teams monthly All teachers 1/30, 1/31 & The principal and team leaders K-5 Professional development on various formats of Impact teams and peer/teacher effective feedback. 2/1 11/18,2/6-8, & 5/22-24. The principal and team leaders K-5 All teachers, Core Collaborative consultant Analysis of trends from MOTP All teachers weeks of Principal 11/21, 1/3, 2/20, & 4/7 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly reports by the principal at PTA meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitute teacher coverage for Instructional round days 0  80 minute PD to view videotapes. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will meet at least 1 of the learning goals which they created based on the feedback they received on the 2017-2018 MOTP as measured by student tasks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. teacher created tasks within the specific content area. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As evidenced by the comparison between our Framework for Great Schools Element Scores 2017 & 2018, there was a significant decrease 4.71 to 4.48 in Strong Family Community Ties in 2017. 98% of the parents responded that since the beginning of the school they likely to attend a general school meeting, school event, etc. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of parents will attend a student led conference as evidenced by attendance sheets. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? New parent workshops, "Getting Acquainted with PS 35" for in coming parents and new families. New families 9/6 & 9/8 Parent Curriculum meeting Student Goal folders End of unit parent celebrations in ELA or Math Parents teachers September 13th student, parents, and teachers All classroom teachers Six times across the school year specific dates TBA, teacher teams decide Dates chosen by specific classroom teachers beginning in late October 2018-June 2019 Principal, parent coordinator, and PTA co-presidents Principal, parent coordinator, and PTA co-presidents Principal, parent coordinator Principal. classroom teachers, and parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  Parent coordinator will take the a leadership role in analyzing the data on parent attendance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 60% of parents will have attended at least 2 student led conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Attendance Sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Reading below grade level standards as evidenced by Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments, students scoring level 1 or 2 on Common Formative Assessments. Students not meeting grade level standards as evidenced by 2017NYS Math exam in grades 3-5 and in grades K-2 students performing level 1 or 2 work as evidenced by formative assessments. Students performing a level 2 or below the 2017 grade 4 Science exam. And students in grades K-3 & 5 who are performing level 1 or 2 work as evidenced by formative and summative assessments. Students who are performing level 1 or 2 work as evidenced by formative and Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Repeated reading for Close reading, Foundations and and orton-gillingham program, and Tier II pull-out intervention by IEPteacher. Multiple entry points for Math exemplars and Tier II pull-out intervention by IEPteacher. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Whole group, small group, one-to-one During classroom instruction, and after school program Small group, one-to-one During classroom instruction, and after school program Multiple entry points using hands on approach component of FOSS curriculum. Small group, one-to-one During classroom instruction Multiple entry points Small group, one-to-one During classroom instruction 5  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) summative assessments. Students involved in bullying incidents. Students having behavioral issues that are disruptive to the educational process. TCIS, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Support and Respect for all curriculum Small group, one-to-one During classroom instruction 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Not applicable Not applicable Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). There are four students in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7 School supplies are provided for these students. At-risk counseling is offered to students who are exhibiting difficulties either academically, socially or emotionally. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $3,260 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. NA 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). NA Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. NA 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local NA 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 0  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 35, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 35 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 4  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 35, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 5  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 6  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 7  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 8  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Clove Valley School Borough Staten Island School Number 035 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Melissa Garofalo Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lisa Aristide Teacher/Subject Area Lisa Baravecchio/2 nd grade Teacher/Subject Area Jillian Rezza/ 5th grade Related-Service Provider Christine Treglia Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal n/a Coach n/a School Counselor Lauren Rodriguez Parent Rosetta Caravello Parent Coordinator Margaret Feminella Field Support Center Staff Member Cristina Ponsell Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 370 Total number of ELLs 9 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.43% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Teacher's College Running Records, Letter and Sound Recognition Running Records, concepts of Print Running Records and Fountas and Pinnell to assess the early literacy skills of all our students. The ENL students are given the above mentioned assessments as well as the results of the NYSITEL exam. The results of this data helps the classroom and ENL teacher to collaborate and guide instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Assessment pacing calendar 1  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 35 utilizes a stand alone and integrated model for our ENL instruction. We evaluate the success of the program by using the Response to Intervention Action Plan. All ENL students are screened at least four times per year to identify which students are at risk for below level outcomes in reading. We use Running Records, Teachers College Assessments, Fountas and Pinnell Non Fiction Assessments, and CFA's (Common Formative Assessments). Tier two progress monitoring is done monthly to determine student progress and to identify whether modifications or reductions to the Tier 2 intervention are required. The student's conference notebook is used to monitor their progress in reading and writing. Assessment folders and reading folders are submitted to the RTI team monthly, as well as sent home to the parents to create accountability between home and school. The same is true of student's receiving tier three interventions, however, the progress is monitored once every two weeks. Our ELL program has been successful because the majority of students test "commanding"on the NYSESLAT within two years. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Assessment pacing calendar 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The schools RTI team will review data in regards to requests for Tier 2 and 3 interventions (ARIS, Running Records, Progress Reports, Teachers College Assessment, Words Their Way Spelling Inventory, CFA's ( Common Formative Assessments, Running Records) Teachers will be properly trained to successfully implement the RTI model and will be given strategies to use within the classroom and ELL setting. Staff will analyze curriculum and interventions that are in place in order to successfully meet the needs of all students. ENL strategies will be used in the areas of phonics/word recognition, fluency and comprehension. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In our school, the majority of ENL students enter in Kindergarten on either an emerging, transitioning, or expanding level. Most of the ENL's pass the NYSESLAT within the first two years of services. The majority score higher on the Listening and Speaking sections than they do on the Reading and Writing components. The few children who remain ENL students have been diagnosed with additional learning disabilities. However, the ENL teacher continues to focus on the necessary components of the NYSESLAT that they struggle with. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Assessment Pacing calendar Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. a. We use a push- in (co-teaching) model as well as a pull- out model depending on the needs of the students and the results of the LabR and NYSESLAT exams.b. Students who are "pulled out" for ELL services are grouped by either:-the results of the LAB R-the results of the NYSESLAT-home language-their RTI Action PlanStudents who are "pulled out" for ELL services are in a heterogeneous group with other students who are within one grade level as them. (Example - A Kindergarten and First grade grouping) 2  b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We have a total of thirteen ELL students in our school. The ELL teacher is able to provide the mandated 360 minutes for beginners/intermediate students, and 180 minutes for advanced ELLs. In addition, the ELL teacher provides continuation of services for children who passed the NYSELSAT and are transitioning into a general education class by pushing in to their classrooms to provide the necessary scaffolding. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All our instruction, for all content areas is provided in English. The ELL teacher differentiates instruction for the ELL students by building content vocabulary for their units of study in Social Studies, Science, and Math. We use multiple means of assessment for examining student gains and instructional improvements among all teachers. Regular quality review cycles, where data is gathered and analyzed to track the development of students and teachers over time, allow appropriate program refinement. These means of assessment include: Teacher's college Assessments K-5 Running Records - Grades 1-5 Weekly Assessments Grades K-5 Words Their Way Spelling Inventory - Grades K-2 Common Formative Assessment - Grades K-5 Fountas and Pinnell NonFiction Running Records - Grades 1-5 LabR and NYSESLAT results Periodic Exams Reading and Writing Conferences documented in the student's Reading and Writing notebooks. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At this time, our school has a freestanding ESL program and evaluations are done in English. If in the future, we receive a child who needs to be evaluated in their native language, we will provide that service 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We do not have any SIFE students. Our population of ELLs who have been in the school for less than three year refers to children in Kindergarten, first or second grade. Please see question #3 for an explanation of instruction. We do not have any ELL students who have been receiving service for 4-6 years or long-term ELLs. Since our numbers are so low, former ELLs are included in the freestanding ELL program for one year, then they are evaluated to determine if they still would benefit from ELL services. If the child is functioning in the classroom, on or above grade level, then they will no longer receive ELL services 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 3  Our school uses guided reading and Envision Math to support ELLs. All of our students have access to brand new Mac Book computers. In addition, each classroom is equipped with a Smart Board. Based on the data from the NYSESLAT, the children who need assistance in the listening/speaking strand, are utilizing laptops that record, and books on tape. The children who need assistance in the reading/writing strand are utilizing the Smartboard and/or the laptop computers to publish writing pieces. In addition, a subscription to the web based internet site, Tumblebooks, has been purchased to provided thousands of illustrated read alouds and comprehension tasks for ELL students. The books are available in a variety of languages. In addition, dual language picture dictionaries are utilized. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school differentiates instruction for all students including ELL's and SWDs. As mentioned above, the use of technology is used to scaffold instruction and provide content vocabulary and prior knowledge. Our school uses the Envision Math program (an online program that provides graphics and explinations) to clarify math concepts for our ELL students. In addition, the program contains a component specifically targeted for ELL students. Since we utilize the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project, our students (including ELLs) are all aware of their current independent level, participate in guided reading work (with the classroom, and/or ELL teacher) on one level higher text, and they are all aware of the level that they need to achieve in order to successfully complete the grade. The service providers (speech, occupational therapy, ELL, and guidance) work together before the start of the school year to coordinate their schedules to accommodate the students I.E.P. mandates and mandated ELL minutes. All services are implemented in the least restrictive environment in either a push in or pull-out model. We currently have two C.T.T. classes that service children in the least restrictive environment. Our Response to Intervention Team determines the needs of students with disabilities. Tier I situations receive intervention services in their classrooms. We offer a small group extended day program that they would be required to attend. Tier II situations would receive academic interventions out of the classroom, and a service provider service them in a small group, different location. Tier III students would be evaluated and a determination would be made by the RTI team to decide if they should be placed in an ITC class. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other content areas include enrolling the students in the extended day program, as well as an after school tutoring program. These programs focus on language development and comprehension of ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science. English is the language used for these programs. Since there are only twelve ELL students, all of them are enrolled in our intervention programs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are currently training teachers to implement the Wilson Reading Intervention Program to use with ELLs and SWDs. In addition, we are using the Fundations program with Kindergarten and First Grade students at risk. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There will not be any discontinued programs for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. They are invited to attend our schools extended day program, as well as a test sophistication program. ELLs are also invited to participate in our extra-curricular activities such as music, Family Game Night, Art Night and P.T.A. sponsered events. A translated notice is sent home with the child in their native language to inform families of these events. Paste response to question here 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 4  Instructional materials that are currently being used with our ELL students include : -Wilson Reading Intervention Program -Fundations -Words their Way for English Language Learners -Fontas and Pinnell Non-Fiction Reading Kits -Envision Math -Houton Mifflin Social Studies and Science -Starfall.com, Brainpopjr.com, Tumblebooks.com, and Envision Math are used for the technology component. Since we only have 15 ELL students, they are divided into sub- groups by grade. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We support the student's native language by providing correspondence to the parents in their home language, as well as provide translators for in school programs. (PTA meetings, IEP meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences) If necessary, the ELL teacher designs and implements lessons that focus on similar cognates in the the student's home language to help the student recognize the similar patterns in English. Turn -key training is provided for classroom and cluster teachers to help them incorprate native language support strategies 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ELL student's are grouped by grade as of now. However, if we were to receive a newly admitted ELL student, they could possibly be grouped with a grade one level above or below their current grade. Age appropriaate services are delivered by the ELL teacher. Kindergarteners are encouraged to draw and label for writing activities, and to use a full sentence in listening and speaking activities. Children in 5th grade are encouraged to use more complex vocabulary in both writing, speaking and listening. Students in lower grades are utilizing lower level books. ( Teachers College levels A-I) while students in upper grades are using books at a higher level. Resources, including internet access, website subscriptions, bilingual dictionaries, and math manipulatives are supplied to our ELL students. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials that are currently being used with our ELL students include : -Wilson Reading Intervention Program -Fundations -Words their Way for English Language Learners -Fontas and Pinnell Non-Fiction Reading Kits -Envision Math -Houton Mifflin Social Studies and Science -Starfall.com, Brainpopjr.com, Tumblebooks.com, and Envision Math are used for the technology component. Since we only have 15 ELL students, they are divided into sub- groups by grade. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We do not currently have a program that assists newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year. If an ELL student enrolls during the school year, the student will be placed in our extended day program, as well as an after school tutoring program, if need be. The student would be given instruction in a small group envioronment with a teacher who scaffolds instruction to allow him/her to meet the standard 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. 5  In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. The ELL teacher attends workshops within the Literacy Consultants, reads professional articles and books, and attends webinars as professional development. In school, our teachers meet with the principal for a 45 minute professional development series. The topics are as follows: - September 12 : Creading text dependent questions - September 19: Instructional Shifts - September 26: Teacher Teams and Leadership Development - October 3 : Math Exemplars in Problem Solving - October 10 : Teacher Team Math Exemplars in Problem Solving - October 17 : Creating text dependent questions for Close Reading Excerpts - October 24 : Assessing students writing on text dependent questions - November 1 : ELA Performance Tasks : Upper Grades - November 7 : ELA Performance Tasks : Lower Grades - November 14 : Scaffolding for ELLs and Students with Special Needs - November 28 : Creating Text dependent questions for Close Reading Excerpts - December 5 : Assessing students' writing on text dependent questions - December 12 : Teacher Teams/ Math exemplar problem solving - December 19 : Teacher Team / Math Exemplar Problem Solvin - January 2 : Teacher Team ELA Performance Tasks ( Upper Grades) - January 9 : Teacher Team ELA Performance Tasks ( Lower Grades) - January 16 : Creating text dependent questions - January 23: Assessing students' writing on text dependent questions -January 30: Teacher Team/ Math Exemplar Problem Solving - February 6 : Teacher Team / E.L.A. - February 13: Creating text dependent questions ( Instructional Shifts) - February 27: Assessing students' writing on text dependent questions - March 6 : Teacher Team ELA Performance Task ( upper grades) - March 13 : Teacher Team ELA Performance Task (lower grades) - March 20 : Teacher Team - Math Exemplar Problem Solving - March 27 : Testing Meeting - April 10 : Creating text dependent questions for Close Reading - April 24 : Assessing students' writing on text dependent questions - May 8 : Teacher Team : Math Exemplar Problem Solving - May 15 : Teacher Team/ Math Exemplar Problem Solving - May 22 : Teacher Team / ELA - Upper Grades - May 29 : Teacher Team/ ELA - Lower Grades - June 5 : Teacher Team ELA Performance Tasks - June 12 : Reflecting on Curriculum Unit of Study - June 19: Reflecting on Curriculum Unit of Study 6  The ELL teacher works collaboratively with the Kindergarten teachers and the principal, one period every week, to analyze student work. They then modify their teaching techniques, and discuss ways to scaffold instruction for ELLs. 2. The ELL teacher attends workshops within the 409 network, reads professional articles and books, and attends webinars as professional development. In addition, she attended seminars this summer about engaging ELLs with the Common Core Learning Standards. A book group led by the principal based on the book, Rigorous Reading" is held one time a week, and the ELL teacher, as well as classroom teachers are participating.. 1. The ELL teacher attends workshops within the Literacy Consultants, reads professional articles and books, and attends webinars as professional development. In school, our teachers meet with the principal for a 45 minute professional development series. The topics are as follows: - September 12 : Creading text dependent questions - September 19: Instructional Shifts - September 26: Teacher Teams and Leadership Development - October 3 : Math Exemplars in Problem Solving - October 10 : Teacher Team Math Exemplars in Problem Solving - October 17 : Creating text dependent questions for Close Reading Excerpts - October 24 : Assessing students writing on text dependent questions - November 1 : ELA Performance Tasks : Upper Grades - November 7 : ELA Performance Tasks : Lower Grades - November 14 : Scaffolding for ELLs and Students with Special Needs - November 28 : Creating Text dependent questions for Close Reading Excerpts - December 5 : Assessing students' writing on text dependent questions - December 12 : Teacher Teams/ Math exemplar problem solving - December 19 : Teacher Team / Math Exemplar Problem Solvin - January 2 : Teacher Team ELA Performance Tasks ( Upper Grades) - January 9 : Teacher Team ELA Performance Tasks ( Lower Grades) - January 16 : Creating text dependent questions - January 23: Assessing students' writing on text dependent questions -January 30: Teacher Team/ Math Exemplar Problem Solving - February 6 : Teacher Team / E.L.A. - February 13: Creating text dependent questions ( Instructional Shifts) - February 27: Assessing students' writing on text dependent questions - March 6 : Teacher Team ELA Performance Task ( upper grades) - March 13 : Teacher Team ELA Performance Task (lower grades) - March 20 : Teacher Team - Math Exemplar Problem Solving - March 27 : Testing Meeting - April 10 : Creating text dependent questions for Close Reading - April 24 : Assessing students' writing on text dependent questions - May 8 : Teacher Team : Math Exemplar Problem Solving - May 15 : Teacher Team/ Math Exemplar Problem Solving - May 22 : Teacher Team / ELA - Upper Grades - May 29 : Teacher Team/ ELA - Lower Grades - June 5 : Teacher Team ELA Performance Tasks - June 12 : Reflecting on Curriculum Unit of Study - June 19: Reflecting on Curriculum Unit of Study The ELL teacher works collaboritevly with the Kindergarten teachers and the principal, one period every week, to analyze student work. They then modify their teaching techniques, and discuss ways to scaffold instruction for ELLs. 2. The ELL teacher attends workshops within the 409 network, reads professional articles and books, and attends webinars as professional development. In addition, she attended seminars this summer about engaging ELLs with the Common Core Learning Standards. A book group led by the principal based on the book, Rigorous Reading" is held one time a week, and the ELL teacher, as well as classroom teachers are participating. 7  The ELL teacher attends workshops within the district, reads professional articles and books, and attends webinars as professional development. In addition, she attended seminars this summer about engaging ELLs with the Common Core Learning Standards. A book group led by the principal based on the book, Rigorous Reading" is held one time a week, and the ELL teacher, as well as classroom teachers are participating. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ELL teacher, parent coordinator, guidance counselor and principal remain in contact with the ELL students when they transition to middle school. 4. The ELL teacher attends workshops within the district, reads professional development articles, and attends webinars. She then provides at least 7.5 hours of ELL training for all the staff of the school after school or on non- attendance days. Workshop topics are focused on helping our ELL population reach the new Common Core Standards. The focus has been close reading and developi ng text depended questions. We are also focusing on developing vocabulary for our ELL students, and scaffolding math lessons to help our ELLs to succeed. The ELL teacher, parent coordinator, guidance counselor and principal remain in contact with the ELL students when they transition to middle school. 4. The ELL teacher attends workshops within the district, reads professional development articles, and attends webinars. She then provides at least 7.5 hours of ELL training for all the staff of the school after school or on non- attendance days. Workshop topics are focused on helping our ELL population reach the new Common Core Standards. The focus has been close reading and developi ng text depended questions. We are also focusing on developing vocabulary for our ELL students, and scaffolding math lessons to help our ELLs to succeed. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1. The parents of student’s at P.S. 35 are very involved. Some of the events that the parent’s are invited to are: Art night, game night, writing celebrations, trips, choral calvalcade, concerts, heritage celebrations, ethnic food festivals and trips. 2. The ESL teacher provides workshops to the ELL parents, and recommends community agencies to the parents. 3. We evaluate the needs of the parents through the parent survey, and through our Parent Teacher Association. 4. Our parental involvement activities give our parents a chance to be actively involved with their children’s education and affords them the opportunity to celebrate their successes 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Afterschool student-parent program, open door policy Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 8  P.S. 35 is a unique school because it has such a small population, in general, and even fewer ELL students. The majority of our children come in as Kindergarteners or First Graders- and the same is true of our ELL population. These same ELL students tend to become proficient according to the NYSESLAT within one to two years. Continuation of ELL services might be necessary in a few cases, but the majority of our ELL students quickly assimilate to regular classe: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Melissa Garofalo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R035 School Name: PS 35 Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Home Language survey at time of enrollment, 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language English and Spanish Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Lunch forms, DOE generated notices, school based generated notifications are furnished upon request. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Fall/Spring Parent Teacher conferences, Fall Curriculum nights, spring next grade orientation, parent workshops throughtout the year, student showcases schoolwide and classroom based that parents are invited. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 3  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent yearly survey 4 
