 31R074 School Name: P.S. 74 FUTURE LEADERS ELEMENTARY SCHOOL Principal: HANIN HASWEH   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 353100010074 K-5 211 Daniel Low Terrace Staten Island, NY 10301 718-727-5380 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Future Leaders Elementary School – PS 74R School Number (DBN): 31R074 718-727-5386 Fax: Phone Number: School Contact Person: Email Address: Hanin Hasweh hhasweh@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Hanin Hasweh Kimberly Lopez Co-president TiaWalker Co-president JoeanVillarin Vivian Porcu EmilyGiaumarc N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 31 VincenzaGallassio Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace Building A, Room 141 Superintendent’s Office Address: Staten Island, NY 10301 VGallas@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address:   718-420-5667 (718) 420-5745 Phone Number: Staten Island FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Moran Executive Director: 715 Ocean Terrace kmoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7185568367 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Hanin Hasweh Vivian Porcu TiaWalker EmilyGiammarcs Sparkle Lambert MaggiVan Name Jane Drexel *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT   Name Deana Jean MargaritaCampos Torres NikkitaAllain YeasminLina TiaWalker Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The Future Leaders Elementary School family synergizes to build a trusting, respectful, and proactive learning environment for all. We foster socially responsible, interdependent lifelong leaders.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Future Leaders Elementary School (FLES) is a public school established in September 2010. We are a zoned school that serves the children and families who live in the St. George, Tompkinsville, Ward Hill and New Brighton neighborhoods on the North Shore of Staten Island, NY. We share a campus with P.S. 16/P.S. 10, and we educate ~300 students from kindergarten to grade 5. FLES is built upon a professional learning community in which all stakeholders believe in nurturing extraordinary thinkers who are capable of creating self-directed and purposeful lives. We recognize that all children have the ability and right to learn in an environment that is focused on their achievement and respects and celebrates their culture. We foster the cognitive, social, physical and emotional growth of all of our students through a first rate, high quality, and rigorous education. Staff members come together to collaborate in teacher teams daily, weekly and monthly. They set goals, create action plans, reflect on individual and collective progress, meet with the school leader in one-on-one conversations, conduct data studies, engage in the inquiry process, review and revise instructional designs and initiatives and participate in child study and professional development. All members of the FLES staff are dedicated to the work we do as we open doors for tomorrow’s leaders! At FLES we strongly believe that our children thrive in a learning environment that provides them with the protective factors that will best nurture their development. These factors include a caring, safe and supportive environment, high expectations for student success and meaningful engagement within our community. Our students participate in the Leader in Me program that focuses on developing their personal leadership development. This program engages our entire school community in Stephen Covey’s 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. We are a Balanced Literacy and Mathematics school that utilizes School Wide Literacy and Go Math instructional materials, within the workshop model. Students have science, physical education, health, visual arts, and literacy through theater electives during the week. FLES values every opportunity for our school family to reach out to the community to develop and build partnerships that reinforce our investment in tomorrow’s global leaders. Our collaborative efforts serve as bridge that connects our school and families to help expose our students to a well-rounded education. To support our strong family and community ties, we enthusiastically collaborate with universities and colleges, cultural institutions, non-profit organizations, arts experience organizations, health organizations, and most importantly parents and caregivers. FLES proudly participates and collaborates with Too Good for Drugs (NYPD), Literacy INC and United Activities Unlimited. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. FLES is committed the equity and excellence initiative for all students. We strive to create an engaging, standards driven learning environment supported by high academic expectations to meet the needs of all students. Our school has an identified high population of English Language Learners and Special Education students. The majority of our English Language Learners come from homes where Spanish is their first language. Many of these students have challenges in their language acquisition which hinders their academic progress. Our special education subgroup is challenged with meeting grade level standards in the academic areas of ELA and math. Special education students have difficulty accessing and understanding grade level texts and need support in developing effective use of mathematical knowledge to solve problems. With full implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards, our 0  school community will work together to decrease the learning gap in these subgroups and increase student achievement. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As a school community, this school year, FLES is focused on continuing to grow in our alignment with the Framework for Great Schools. The two main focus areas are supportive environment and rigorous instruction. We will continue to ensure that our leaders are fully engaged in rigorous learning and that we are maintaining a learning environment that is safe, supportive and challenging. In alignment with the Framework of Great Schools we have made the most progress in Effective School Leadership and Trust. FLES will continue to further enhance these areas of success by collaborating with teachers and staff, parents, and community organizations to enrich learning opportunities. In addition, our learning community will continue to work collaboratively and work towards shared goals in improving student outcomes by preparing students for the 21st century. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R074 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 312 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 60 60 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 18 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 89.4% % Reduced Lunch 23.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 60.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.23 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 29.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 30 30 8 88.9% 1.6% 31.4% 26.3% 6.1% 0.6% 2 19% 6.4 26.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The academic programs at Future Leaders Elementary School are proficient according to the results of the 2017-2018 Quality Review report. For quality indicator 1.1 the findings communicated that school leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and integrate the instructional shifts. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data so that tasks provide access for a diversity of learners. Quality indicator 1.2 included, pedagogy across classrooms reflects a common set of beliefs about how students learn best and incorporates the instructional shifts. Across most classrooms there are high levels of student thinking, engagement and participation as demonstrated in student work products. Performance trends demonstrate steady progress in student achievement. Based on school benchmark assessments, reading level proficiency increased by 8% across grades from first to fifth grade by June 2018. New York State exam data results for spring 2018 were: 29% of students were proficient in ELA. 26% of students were proficient in math.  26% of 172 leaders tested demonstrated proficiency in mathematics. 5% of English language learners and 8% leaders with individual education programs met the proficiency expectations in mathematics.  29% of 167 leaders tested demonstrated proficiency in ELA. 5% of English language learners and 8% of leaders with individual education programs met the proficiency expectations in ELA.  63 leaders assessed by the NYSESLAT exam: 7 commanding; 26 expanding; 21 transitioning; 9 emerging; 0 entering Rigorous Instruction Strengths:  All selected instructional materials being used at the school are CCLS aligned.  Integrated teaching models are used for Integrated Collaborative Team programs, ENL groups, and special needs supports.  Teaching practices are focused on increasing engagement and accountability.  Purposeful decisions are made to build coherence and promote college and careers.  Curricula are planned and refined based on data and student work.  ELLs and SWDs have full access to grade level curricula. Priority Needs: 3   Focus on foundational skills instruction for K-2 students, especially those who did not meet the expectations for grade level progress by June 2019. Support teachers in the use of strategies to help our ELLs and SWDs Support a focus on developing fluency and problem solving skills in mathematics K-5 Support consistent implementation of word study and guided reading K-5     Professional development focused on deepening understanding of CCLS through impact teams and the formative assessment process  Professional development focused on deepening the understanding of the balanced literacy systems and structures across grades k-5.  Consistently embed opportunities for increased student engagement in and ownership of deeper learning. (QR 2017-2018) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all faculty and staff will synergize to prepare all students for college and careers by providing them with a well-rounded, CCLS aligned education with a focus on CCLS foundational skills, and reading standard 10 as measured by a 10% increase in the percentage of students making progress towards grade level in reading. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Implement the Go Math, Amplify Science and Schoolwide Literacy curriculum resources K-5th students Sept. - Oct. 2018 All classroom, cluster teachers, admin. team Implement core curriculum social studies option- Passports to Social Studies. Focus on word study in the literacy block: K-5th students K-5th students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, admin team Sept. 2018 Secretary, admin team A. implement Fundations K-2nd curriculum B. purchase Sadlier Phonics K-3rd C. purchase Sadlier Grammar Workshop 3rd - 5th D. purchase Universal Handwriting K-5th Focus on improving teacher pedagogy and school leader effectiveness: K-5th students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Secretary, admin team A. Provide teachers with professional development in support of Reading and Writing instruction (K-5) B. Provide teachers with professional development in support of Math instruction focused on problem solving (3-5) B. Collaborate with Staten Island Field Support Center to support special education in writing quality IEPs and goals. We will also collaborate with the FSC to support teachers in planning lessons that align to SDI components. D. collaborate with the Staten Island Field Support Center for professional development on shared reading (K-2) E. admin team attend annual ASCD conference Engage in Impact Teams on topics such as the formative assessment process, engagement, analysis of student work and unit planning. All teachers and paras Through-out 2018-2019 on Monday PD time Admin team, PD team and instructional teacher leaders 5  Admin. team members will engage in cycles of observation All teachers October Admin team Use of Every Day Counts Calendar Math kits K-5th students School wide data collection will include benchmark periods and progress monitoring periods. K-5th students Incorporating technology into classroom lessons with the use of desktops, SmartBoards, laptops, ipads, and web licenses for all classrooms. Web licences that need to be updated will be processed. K-5th students 2018 - May 2019 September 2018- June 2019 2018-2019 Benchmark periods include: Sept/Oct., January, May/June Progress Monitoring periods include: November and March/April K-2nd Sept. - June 2019 Secretary, admin team All teachers, data specialist, admin team All classroom, cluster and support teachers, admin team Implementation of the FLES Schoolwide Enrichment Model weekly on Thursdays. 2nd-5th students Nov. 2018- June 2019 Admin team, SEM coordinator After school programs designed to support language proficiency for ELLs and academic progress for students performing in the lowest third to half of grade levels. These programs will be integrated with the NYS ESD/SVP granted program. Oct . - May 2019 Selected teachers, admin team 1st to 5th students based on AIS eligibility and proficiency levels SLT to host annual Parent Fair with workshops focused on sharing strategies and instructional methods to support children's progress. Parents of K-5th students March 15, 2019 Teachers plan and host College and Career Week K- 5th students 11/26/2018-11/30/2018 Implementation of a RTI guided reading/skills sharpening sessions 4 days per week, for .5 hours. K-5th students Start: Sept 2018- June 2019 SLT members, teacher and paraprofessional volunteers, admin team Committee members, admin team All classroom, cluster and support teachers, paraprofessionals, admin team 6 Instructional schedule for classrooms include increased time for mathematics K-2nd = 75 minutes, 3rd-5th = 90 minutes; an literacy K-2nd =170 minutes, 3rd-5th = 155 minutes. School administrators will attend the 2019 ASCD Conference School administrators will attend the 2018 Summit for Courageous Conversations K-5th students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Admin team Founding and Acting Principals Founding and Acting Principals March 15-March 18 Admin Team Admin team October 21-October 24, 2018 Student led book fair; students will choose books of high interest to promote culturally responsive book sets in classrooms. K-5 Students March 1, 2019 Admin team, Literacy Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As a school community we will engage families and support their understanding of rigorous instruction and how to help their children in various ways including: September family curriculum night 9/17/18 PBIS Pep Rally 10/18/18 and 10/19/18 Family Literacy Night 11/1/18 Coffee and Chat with Ms. Hasweh monthly starting 10/2018-5/2019 College and Career week 11/26/18 Parent/Teacher conferences 11/2018 Family Math night 3/2018 Student Led Conferences March and May 2019 for grades 3-5 Key personnel include: Parent coordinator Admin. team PBIS/Lighthouse teacher team School teachers 7  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling:  Professional development opportunities including Monday Professional Learning time and full day PD sessions across the school year focused on Literacy instruction (K-5) and NTN math coaching (3-5)  Professional development opportunities for administrators in alignment with the Equity and Excellence citywide focus.  Teacher Team Tuesday time for Inquiry and to support continued professional discourse and application of their learning.  Teachers whose practice is trending to be developing or ineffective will be supported by school leaders with a personalized professional learning/improvement plan. Leadership Day 2018-2019  Weekly School-wide Enrichment Model sessions  PBIS Rally October 2018   Monthly Families as Learning Partners events, Open Access, parent workshops, family night events,  Annual Parent Fair, monthly Coffee and Chat sessions with the principal, and student performances.  Guided reading/RTI time integrated into bell schedule and literacy block schedule Personnel:  Per session funds will be used to support after school program for supervisor  NYS ESV/SVP funds for afterschool program  Title III funds for supplemental resources and afternoon program OTPS   Funds will be used to purchase classroom and program materials, supplies, resources, professional development, etc. Funds will be used for professional development opportunities for administrators, teachers and paras. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By the end of February 2019, the administration team will monitor student performance and progress in foundational skills and reading standard 10 as measured by a 5% increase between beginning and middle of year F & P reading assessments. 2. By the end of February 2019, the administration team will review unit plan alignment to CCLS to monitor the full implementation of appropriately rigorous units of study as evidenced by a 5% increase in Advance ratings in components 1e- Designing Coherent Instruction. 8  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Unit plans on Google Drive  Fountas and Pinnell Literacy Benchmark System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data from the 2017-2018 school year show that supportive environment has been a focus for this learning community. The 2017-2018 Quality Review findings for quality indicator 3.4 explain that school leaders consistently emphasize a culture of learning that communicates high expectations, and provide training for all members of the learning community. School leaders and staff effectively communicate expectations connected to a path to college and career readiness. In July 2016 our school was removed from the NYS Persistently Dangerous List. Our school SVTI index was respectively reported as .63. Performance trends demonstrate steady progress in student achievement. Based on school benchmark assessments, reading level proficiency increased by 12% in levels three and four across grades from first to fifth by June 2018. New York State exam data results for spring 2018 were:  26% of 172 leaders tested demonstrated proficiency in mathematics. 5% of English language learners and 8% leaders with individual education programs met the proficiency expectations in mathematics.  29% of 167 leaders tested demonstrated proficiency in ELA. 5% of English language learners and 8% of leaders with individual education programs met the proficiency expectations in ELA.  63 leaders assessed by the NYSESLAT exam: 7 commanding; 26 expanding; 21 transitioning; 9 emerging; 0 entering Supportive Environment Strengths:  High expectations result in a culture of collaboration and accountability for teachers, leaders, and families,  which create an atmosphere conducive to the developmental needs of students. (QR) School leaders successively partner with families to help them understand and support student learning, social-emotional growth, progress and ownership of learning.   School has successfully implemented a Positive Behavior Intervention System, year four 2017-2018. School culture is based on personal leadership development that is supported through the implementation of the Leader in Me program, coupled with Lion’s Quest lessons. Lessons taught are aligned to the CCLS and engage the learners in thoughtful rigorous instruction. 0    With this small learning community each student is well known by more than one adult  School leaders and faculty and staff frequently communicate with families and provide opportunities for family engagement. Priority Needs: Implement PBIS Tier 2 systems and structures consistently   Maintain supportive school community environment Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school community will maintain a supportive classroom and school culture so that our students feel safe, and challenged by their teachers and peers as measured by a 10% increase in staff, parent and student Leader In Me Beginning of Year and End of Year surveys. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development for faculty and staff will focus on developing strategies and structures that promote positive behaviors and reduce incidents. The PBIS Team will implement Tier 2 systems and structures to reduce behavior incidences. This program will provide small group behavior supports. A group of staff and faculty will be identified to be trained in and administer these supports including ELLs, students with special needs and students with social emotional challenges. Implement a data collection system for major and minor incidences that the Lighthouse/PBIS team will analyze twice a month and provide supports for teachers in redirecting behaviors. PBIS Pep Rally and a community meeting lead by the PBIS team will be hosted for families. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All faculty and staff 2018-2019 school year All faculty and staff Students who need more supports than Tier 1. All faculty and staff and K-5th students Parents and K-5th students 2018-2019 school year Selected group of faculty and staff 2018-2019 school year Lighthouse/PBIS Team 2018-2019 school year 10/19/18 Lighthouse/PBIS Team, Administration, and Parent Coordinator A Positive Behavior Family Information Brochure will be shared with families by the PBIS team. Parents Sept. 2018 Lighthouse/PBIS team, admin team Purchase Leader in Me student materials and teachers guides Sept. 2018 K-5th students Implement positive behavior incentives for individuals and whole classes. K-5th students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Secretary, admin team All teachers, Lighthouse/PBIS team, admin team Leader in Me, PBIS workshops during Coffee and Chat with Ms. Hasweh sessions. Parents November 2018 Lighthouse/PBIS team, admin team Leader in Me parent training session. Parents February 2019 May 2019 October 2018 Lighthouse/PBIS 2 PBIS Teacher Reflection Survey will be administered to measure perceptions of progress with PBIS. All Teachers Lighthouse/PBIS January 2019 and June 2019 Purchase coaching package for LIM All faculty/staff and K-5 students August 2018 School Leaders Lighthouse/PBIS team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. As a school community we will engage families and support their understanding of supportive environment and how to help their children in various ways including: September family curriculum night 9/17/18 PBIS Pep Rally 10/19/18 and 10/20/18 Coffee and Chat with Mrs. Hasweh, monthly starting 10/2018-5/2019 College and Career week Parent/Teacher conferences 11/2018 Student Led Conferences March and May 2019 for grades 3-5 Key personnel include: Parent coordinator Admin. team PBIS/Lighthouse teacher team School teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling: 3   Professional development opportunities including Monday Professional Learning time  Teacher Team Tuesday time collaborative planning  PBIS Pep Rally October 2018   Monthly Coffee and Chats with Mrs. Christopher  Annual SLT Parent Fair  Community meetings Leadership Day 2018-2019 Personnel:  Per session funds will be used to support after school Lighthouse/PBIS team planning meetings OTPS  Funds will be used to purchase items to support student incentives, leadership classroom materials, and parent involvement Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of November 2018, Lighthouse/PBIS team will administer a Leader In Me surveys to teachers, parents and students as a baseline for this goal. The Lighthouse team will communicate areas of concern to staff. The team will identify adjustments to school culture by using beginning of year survey results in a memo to staff. By January 2019, teachers will complete a progress survey aligned to areas of concern and show an increase of 5% growth in supportive classroom and school culture. By April 2019, our school community will administer a Leader In Me surveys to teachers, parents and students as a end of year benchmark for this goal. The SLT team will compare beginning and end of year survey data as measured by a 10% increase in survey results. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Leader In Me Teacher Survey NYC Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 Quality Review report  Quality indicator 1.1 the findings communicated that school leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and integrate the instructional shifts. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data so that tasks provide access for a diversity of learners.  Quality indicator 1.2 the findings communicated, pedagogy across classrooms reflects a common set of beliefs about how students learn best and incorporates the instructional shifts. Across most classrooms there are high levels of student thinking, engagement and participation as demonstrated in student work products.  Quality indicator 2.2 the findings communicated, the use of assessments and ongoing collection of formative and summative data across classrooms allows for clear understanding of student progress. The necessary instructional and curricula adjustments resulted in increased performance for the majority of learner. Performance trends demonstrate steady progress in student achievement. Based on school benchmark assessments, reading level proficiency increased by % across grades from first to fifth by June 2018. New York State exam data results for spring 2018 were:  26% of 172 leaders tested demonstrated proficiency in mathematics. 5% of English language learners and 5% leaders with individualized education plans met the proficiency expectations in mathematics.  29% of 167 leaders tested demonstrated proficiency in ELA. 5% of English language learners and 8% of leaders with individualized education plans met the proficiency expectations in ELA.  83% of 59 leaders test demonstrated proficiency in science.  63 leaders assessed by the NYSESLAT exam: 7 commanding; 26 expanding; 21 transitioning; 9 emerging; 0 entering Priority Needs:  Professional development focused on deepening understanding of CCLS through impact teams and the formative assessment process  Professional development focused on Literacy and Math instruction.  Consistently embed opportunities for increased student engagement in and ownership of deeper learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 5  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will meet in grade/team level professional learning communities to collaboratively build capacity in the implementation of the formative assessment process, as evidenced by an increase of 15% of teachers receiving effective and/or highly effective MOTP ratings in 3c and 3d, and an increase of at least 5% in the percentage of students demonstrating proficiency on NYS exams. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Work day schedule and preparation period schedule will include structured time for teacher teams to meet systematically . Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 common planning periods, Monday PL time, Tuesday OPW time Sept. 2018- June 2019 School leaders, grade/team leaders, teacher teams School leaders, Formative Assessment teacher leads Continue participation in the District 31 Formative Assessment focus by attending district level professional development opportunities. All K-5 Teachers Use professional learning books aligned with improving the formative assessment process. All K-5th teachers October 2018 Secretary, admin team Teacher teams will use lesson study, book studies, and/or action research when appropriate to impact student achievement especially for students in the lowest third, ELLs and student with disabilities. All teachers Oct. 2018 - June 2019 School leaders, grade/team leaders and paras Engage in Professional Learning Communities on topics such as the formative assessment process, engagement, and small group instruction. All teachers and paras Grade Team meetings during teacher team time to conduct inquiry cycles to improve instructional practices and meet the needs of most struggling students. K-5th students in the lowest third Professional development choice sessions for teachers in alignment to 3D Formative Assessment systems and structures. K-5 teachers Through-out 2018-2019 on Monday PD time Admin team, PD team and instructional teacher leaders Nov. 2018 through May 2019 Data specialist, teacher teams, admin. team two OPW Tuesdays per month Jan. 2019, Feb. 2019 and March 2019. Admin Team 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As a school community we will engage families and support their understanding of collaborative teachers and how to help their children in various ways including: September family curriculum night 9/17/18 Coffee and Chat with Ms. Hasweh events, monthly starting 10/2018-5/2019 Parent/Teacher conferences 2018-2019 Student Led Conferences March and May 2019 for grades 3-5 Key personnel include: Parent coordinator Admin. team PBIS/Lighthouse teacher team School teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling:  Professional development opportunities including Monday Professional Learning time.  Teacher Team Tuesday time for Inquiry and to support continued professional discourse and application of their learning.  Common planning preparation periods. Personnel:  Grade teams attendance at Core Collaborative sessions.  PD Team will inform Monday PD schedule OTPS  Funds will be used to purchase classroom and professional learning materials, supplies, resources, etc. 8  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher teams will compare cycle PD reflections to identify perceptions of effectiveness of professional learning communities on teacher practice and student achievement as evidence by a 5% gain in cycle effectiveness between cycle 1 and 2. By February 2019, school leaders will analyze middle of the year assessment data to identify trends in the progress of student achievement as evidenced by a 5% in reading levels for all grade 1-5 students. By February 2019, school leaders will monitor and communicate overall Advance rating data to staff with an anticipated 5% gain in teacher ratings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Advance data  middle of the year assessment data  teacher survey data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 Quality Review report  Quality indicator 1.1 the findings communicated that school leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and integrate the instructional shifts. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data so that tasks provide access for a diversity of learners.  Quality indicator 1.2 the findings communicated, pedagogy across classrooms reflects a common set of beliefs about how students learn best and incorporates the instructional shifts. Across most classrooms there are high levels of student thinking, engagement and participation as demonstrated in student work products.  Quality indicator 2.2 the findings communicated, the use of assessments and ongoing collection of formative and summative data across classrooms allows for clear understanding of student progress. the necessary instructional and curricula adjustments resulted in increased performance for the majority of learn Performance trends demonstrate steady progress in student achievement. Based on school benchmark assessments, reading level proficiency increased by 12% across grades from first to fifth by June 2018. New York State exam data results for spring 2017 were:  26% of 172 leaders tested demonstrated proficiency in mathematics. 5% of English language learners and 5% leaders with individualized education plans met the proficiency expectations in mathematics.  29% of 167 leaders tested demonstrated proficiency in ELA. 5% of English language learners and 8% of leaders with individualized education plans met the proficiency expectations in ELA.  83% of 59 leaders test demonstrated proficiency in science.  63 leaders assessed by the NYSESLAT exam: 7 commanding; 26 expanding; 21 transitioning; 9 emerging; 0 entering Priority Needs:  Professional development focused on deepening understanding of CCLS in support of teacher clarity and the formative assessment process including formative walk-throughs.  Consistently embed opportunities for increased student engagement in and ownership of deeper learning. (QR 201/2018) 0   Consistently make effective on the spot adjustments to meet all students learning needs so students are aware of their next steps. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administration team will create systems and structures to support two formative classroom walk-through cycles and at least one inter-school visitation for each school teacher as evidenced by memos, teacher reflection forms, and sign in sheets. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Plan cycles of learning for professional development on Monday afternoons. Teachers and paras Sept. 2018 to June 2019 School leaders, PD team members Purchase professional literature to be used by teams for book study and strategy identification support, with a focus on supports for Ells and SWD. Plan and implement cycles of formative classroom walk-through the use of the Evidence, Analysis, and Action protocol and exit notes after the completion of each cycle. Teachers and paras Oct. 2018 to June 2019 School leaders, school secretary All Teachers Cycle 1 Jan/Feb School leaders 2019 Cycle 2 April/ May 2018 Inter-school visits 10/2018-6/2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As a school community we will engage families and support their understanding of effective school leadership and how to help their children in various ways including: September family curriculum night 9/17/18 Coffee and Chat with Ms. Hasweh events, monthly starting 10/2018-5/2019 Parent workshops at least month 2018-2019 2  Key personnel include: Parent coordinator Admin. team School teachers Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Scheduling:  Professional development opportunities including Monday Professional Learning time.  Walk -through classes and dates Personnel:  Per diem funds will to support teacher coverages OTPS  Funds will be used to purchase classroom and professional learning materials, supplies, resources, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will monitor cycles as evidenced by a 50% completion rate of classroom visits by reviewing planned agendas, sign in sheets, and schedules. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. agendas sign in sheets scheduling memos     Reflection sheets and Evidence/Action/Analysis documents Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strong Family and Community Ties is an element that is very important to the FLES learning community. The first and second highest scores on the FLES school survey were Trust and Strong Family-Community Ties, 88% and 86% respectively. Academic performance trends demonstrate steady progress in student achievement. Based on school benchmark assessments, reading level proficiency increased by an average of 12% across grades by June 2018. NYS exam data shows an 9 percentage point increase in ELA, and 8 percentage point increase in math. It is realized that we can have a greater impact on student achievement if we can increase the amount of time students spend in our classrooms. As of June, 2018 our attendance rate was 88%. Attendance was lowest during half days, before vacations, and during the winter months. We must increase the attendance rate to continue improving student performance. In order to do so we must create stronger ties with the family and community to encourage students’ timely attendance to school. Strong Family-Community Ties Strengths  A variety of faculty and staff are able to speak major languages spoken by parents of the school to support successful communication.  The parent coordinator raises funds to implement relevant and meaningful programming for parents and families.  The school is engaged with a wide variety of community based organizations, and businesses in support of student progress.  There are numerous opportunities for families to participate in class activities, school events, and PTA sponsored events. Priority Needs: Increase student attendance in support of increases student achievement.   Continue to strengthen family and community ties to support student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, our school community will partner with families to increase the percentage of students who regularly attend school 90% of the time by 5%. We will also increase the attendance rate of chronically absent students by 3%, as measured by ATS reports. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The attendance monitoring team will meet weekly to monitor student attendance trends. K-5 Students 2018-2019 School Year Attendance Team Classes with 100% attendance are recognized during morning announcements and are given principal commendation cards. K-5 students 2018-2019 school year Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers Individuals with 100% attendance are recognized with monthly certificates and celebrated on display on a bulletin board. Pictures of 100% attendees for any given month will be advertised on Welcome Center TV. Students will also be recognized at monthly PTA meetings. Teachers will implement class incentives when meeting attendance goals set together. Monthly Rising Star celebrations use timely attendance data to provide positive reinforcement. A family incentive plan will be developed for the 2018-2019 school year with the help of the Parent Coordinator and the PTA. Ideas: -Success Mentor: Partner a staff member with a family to check-in when absences occur K-5 students 2018-2019 Classroom Teachers K-5 Families 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator, PTA, guidance counselor Use of attendance reminders including post cards, school letters, and Blackboard Communication System phone calls are sent to families. K-5 families Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Attendance Team members Students that achieve 100% attendance monthly, will get a 100% attendance certificate, attendance star button, and an invitation to participate in a monthly ice cream party. K-5 students Feb - June 2019 Attendance Team members 6 Classes that have the highest total of 100% attendance each month will have their classroom door decorated with a personalized banner and a pizza party. K-5 students Feb-June 2019 Attendance Team members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Staten Island Mental Health Volunteer Reading program Literacy Inc NYPD Too Good for Drugs Program United Activities Unlimited ACS My Hero and Me Attendance teacher Creative Connections Operation Respect Richmond University Hospital Fidelis Care Boy Scouts of America Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Morning Announcer- protocol, supporting faculty/staff 2. Monthly Rising Star documents collected and analyzed by PBIS Coach during assigned PBIS/data periods 3. Certificates will be printed and distributed in recognition of perfect attendance Schedule will support attendance meetings to be attended by the secretary, administration, attendance aide, guidance counselor, and attendance teacher. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Attendance rates need to be at least 90-91% by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  ATS reports  Attendance team meeting agendas and minutes Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K-5 Reading level that is far below the grade level expectations according toF & Passessments. 3-5 performing below the median scale score between a level 2 and level 3 on the NYSELAexam. K-5 Level 1 math average in chapter assessments and GoMath prerequisite assessments. 3-5performing below the median scale score between a level 2 and level 3 on theNYSmathexam. Science unit assessments at a level 1 Social Studies unit assessment at a level 1 IEP mandates, behavior incident reports show patterns Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1. Small Group 1. Weekday 2. Small Group 2. weekday 3. Small Group 3. During the school day 1. Small Group 1. Weekday 2. Individual or small group 3. Small Group 2. During the day 3. During the day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) 1After schoolSuccess Academy 2. Title III program fro LEP students 3. Tier 2 small group instruction 1. After schoolSuccess Academy 2. Math Centers 3. Tier 2 small group instruction Tier 1 Whole Group Whole Group Tier 1 Whole Group Whole Group Daily Daily 1. Small Group Counseling 2. Peer mediation 1. Small Group 1. During the day 2. Small Group 2. During the day 9  3. Crisis Intervention 3. Small Group 3. During the day 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 35 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. after school programming family engagement activities  High quality, CCLS aligned curriculum and instruction    educational supplies provided  Mandated uniform support Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To ensure that hired teachers are highly qualified, Future Leaders Elementary School employs the following strategies: 1. Administrative staff attends hiring fairs to identify and recruit highly qualified classroom teachers. 2. The school leader collaborates with selected current school teachers to conduct group interviews of candidates. 3. The school secretary will work closely with the Network HR coordinator to ensure that non-HQT meet all required documentation and assessment deadlines. 4. Mentors are assigned to support new, struggling, and/or unqualified teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development includes: ● Tuesday Teacher team time ● Monday PD sessions ● Professional development opportunities offered by the district ● Use of professional development action plan ● Teacher and paraprofessional teams engage in structured professional collaborations using inquiry approach focused on improving student learning. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). ● Curricula is CCLS aligned ● Social worker supports with parent workshops and aligning students with early interventions ● Kindergarten open houses are hosted before the kindergarten application process begins ● Kindergarten new student orientation meetings are hosted in the spring 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A Measures of Student Learning committee will be formed for the 2018/2019 school year. This team will collaborate to identify what the multiple assessments measures would be for the school community. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. 4  Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 10-12 TBA 10-12 TBA 10-12, 13-15, 20-21 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 305535 0 12,366 0 2,461,163 TBA TBA X TBA X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH). 5   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Future Leaders Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Future Leaders Elementary School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 7  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a grade newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. ● develop a PTA corner on our school website. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Future Leaders Elementary School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 9  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 0  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 1  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After analyzing the NYSESLAT we decided to implement 2 programs to support the ELLs. The first program will be titled "Literacy Through Math". The second program will be named "ENL Success Academy". These programs will provide additional opportunities to build reading and writing beyond the ENL services they already receive during the school day. They will be designed to improve students' performance in the four modalities, with a focus on reading and writing, that will prepare them for successful performance on the NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state exams. The majority of the first through fifth grade ELLs are transitioning and expanding. With effective instruction the students will be equipped with the necessary tools to perform successfully on the NYSESLAT, ELA and math state exams. We selected students for this program by looking at the data from the NYSESLAT, math and ELA state exams. Both programs will enhance their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. All instructional resources used during the afterschool components are distinct day time instructional programs. Eleven fourth and fifth grade students will be invited to "Literacy Through Math". The 11 third and fourth grade students have been selected based on their performance on state exams, specifically the ELA and math state exams. When we analyzed we noticed the 11 ELLs were performing at a high level 2. For instruction, we will be supporting the Go Math curriculum with ENL strategies by focusing on all four modalities. This ten week program will run from November 1-January 17 for 2 hours each week. The program will be conducted by 1 ENL teacher and 1 content teacher. The "ENL Success Academy" will run from January 24-April 18 one time per week for 2 hours each week. There will be a total of 3 teachers and 1 supervisor conducting the program. The program will be led by 1 ENL teacher and 2 content area teachers. They will be providing instruction through flexible grouping. Each teacher will have approximately 16 students. We selected first through fourth grade transitioning and expanding ELLs for the program, since we noticed many of the ELLs scored at these levels. Each group of students will spend 50% of the time with the content area teacher and 50% of the time with the ENL teacher. Faculty and staff who work with this program will be paid through Title III funds. Instruction will be in English. Teachers will engage the students using a variety of differentiated resources including, but not limited to, materials found on different websites such as ReadWorks.org and ReadingA-Z.com. In addition, we will use Language Power. As needed, we will purchase additional books to support Language Power. This program empowers ELLs to build English-language proficiency through differentiated resources. Language Power provides rigorous instruction in the four language modalities. In addition, we will incorporate materials designed to explicitly develop oral language. An example of one of the resources is “Let’s Talk About It!” by Mondo. Furthermore, we will purchase books by Attanasio and Associates, Inc. titled "Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT". All supplemental materials purchased with Title III funds for use during "ENL Success Academy" and "Literacy Through Math" will only be utilized during the time the after school programs are being conducted. 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Parent letters will be sent home in preferred languages. The returned letters will be given to the parent coordinator, Ms. Rodriguez, and she will store the letters in a binder in the office. Teachers will be responsible for taking attendance during each session. Ms. Rodriguez will store the attendance folders in the main office, after attendance is taken. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The professional development opportunities provided to our teachers will enhance students’ performance and improve teacher effectiveness. The ENL teachers will continue to provide professional development to the entire staff. The titles of the workshops will be: “Strategies to Support English Language Learners” and “Preparing Students for the NYSESLAT”. The workshops will be conducted during Monday professional development time which is from 2:45-4:00. Therefore, they will be conducted with no cost to Title III funding. In addition, all Title III teachers will have two sessions for each after school program to plan engaging and rigorous lessons. Furthermore, ENL and Title III teachers will attend professional developments offered by the Borough Support Center and DELLSS. The agendas and attendance sheets for professional developments will be stored in the ENL compliance binder under Title III. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent involvement is a fundamental facet of our student's achievement. We will involve parents in the following ways to support higher achievement for ELLs. 1. Parents are strongly encouraged to meet with teachers during Parent Teacher Conferences as well as the Tuesdays set aside for parent involvement. 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 2. During the months of October and November the Parent Coordinator, Ms. Rodriguez, and Sub Committee from Title I will collaborate to create a parent survey. The data gathered from the survey will be used to create tailored parent workshops. 3. Notifications of events, meetings or updates are sent home and translated by the parent coordinator and ENL teachers via flyers, letters and family calendars. Translation services are always provided as needed. 4. With no expense to Title III, an organization for community outreach will meet in October with parents to speak about immigration. The member will explain the updated laws and their rights. Also, the member will help the parents obtain a valid ID and provide other resources for them. 5. The Back to School Family Day was on August 18, 2018 at P.S.74. Many community based organizations attended. They provided literature and resources on immigration, education, free blood screenings and other resourceful topics. 6. The annual Parent Fair will be held in April. It is a day of fun and learning for both parents and their child. Parents and students will be engaged in academic and social workshops. 7. The principal will hold "Coffee and Chat" meetings every other month during the school day for parents. During this time the principal will engage in conversations with parents about their interests. The principal will use the information to plan future workshops for the parents. 8. The ELL teachers will hold a NYSESLAT information session in March to inform ELL parents about the upcoming state exam. 9. The Parent Coordinator, Ms. Rodriguez, will invite families to a program titled "Cookshop for Families". The program will meet one time per month for the duration of five months. 10. One time per month we will invite parents to be a guest reader in classrooms. 11. This year we will continue the "Self Care" parent workshop with Ms. Mauro from NYC Family and Child Health. 12. Ms. Rodriguez will engage parents in monthly computer workshops. 13. The parent coordinator will collaborate with the speech and IEP teacher to assist parents with reading and understanding their child's IEP. 14. The guidance counselor and parent coordinator will conduct a workshop to assist 5th grade parents with the online middle school application process. 15. In November, Literacy Inc. will support families with a one day literacy workshop. 16. Our social worker, Mr. Rivera, will invite New York Connect Staten Island. These specialists will assist with completing applications for Medicaid, Medicare, S.S.I., housing, public assistance and more. 17. On September 18, 2018 fathers were invited to "Dads Take Your Child to School Day". The parent coordinator will file all agendas, sign-in sheets and resource copies for all parent engagement sessions. 6 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Future Leaders Elementary School Borough Staten Island School Number 074 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Nicole Reid-Christopher Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher C. Hanrahan and W. Sousa Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Mr. Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal Hanin Hasweh Coach N/A School Counselor Vanessa Herrera Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Evelyn Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member Enrico Dominguez Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 324 8 Total number of ELLs 82 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 25.31%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? FLES uses the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System school wide. School level assessment data is collected at various points across the school year starting in September/October. Included in the benchmark assessments, students in grades K-5 are administered a student reading interview, running records, primary and/or elementary spelling inventory, phonics and word analysis assessments . This data informs teachers about their decoding, comprehension and word knowledge skills. The analysis of the assessments reveals the linguistic strengths and areas where improvement is needed for the ELLs. It drives the instruction and determines which skills the students have mastered and areas where additional instruction is necessary. Furthermore, the English as New Language teachers administer their own assessment, two times per year, that is similar to the NYSESLAT. The schools instructional plan, in alignment with the Common Core Learning Standards, outlines the areas in which the students need to master by the end of the school year. All of the data is used to plan lessons and guided/strategy groups. 9  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers use Google Docs to record assessment results by class/group. All teachers have access to view assessment information. We have data days to compare and analyze how the students are progressing. Also, this year grade level Impact Teams have one period weekly to meet. Each of our ENL teachers is assigned to a grade for Impact. During this time each grade meets to review student work, analyze data, and review/revise unit plans based on analysis. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The English as New Language teachers analyze NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores each year. They analyze the raw scores in each modality. Lessons are designed to address areas that are highlighted for targeted improvement. Instructional groups are organized by analyzing student progress and their needs based on data and the CCLS. The ELA and math state exams are also analyzed to better understand where the students need support. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered the results are analyzed. The teachers use this data to implement differentiated lessons based on the needs of the students. Also, this data is used to form AIS/RTI groups. Other staff members, in addition to the ENL teachers, may be scheduled to provide AIS/RTI services for ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] FLES uses benchmark data, formative and summative assessments to drive instruction. The core of instruction is Tier 1. It is the in class general instruction. Students that require additional support will have the opportunity to participate in tier 2 instruction and will be provided with extra activities and experiences to support their specific needs. Those that require further support will be provided with intensive support or tier III instruction. The tier III students will receive intensive and individualized instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSITELL reveals that our new admits range between entering and expanding. There are 4 entering, 1 emerging, 4 transitioning and 1 expanding. Based on the 2017 NYSESLAT there are 1 entering, 17 emerging, 20 transitioning, 26 expanding and 3 commanding. Furthermore, we use the math and ELA items skills analysis. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The RLAT is analyzed, students groupings are created based upon their raw scores and proficiency levels. All 4 modalities are evaluated to determine student placement. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our program model consists of heterogeneous classes. The ENL teachers have their programs scheduled so they have one Impact Team meeting. They use the Impact Team meeting to plan units that align to data and analyze student work. The ENL teachers integrate during the literacy block to service entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding students for 180 minutes in most classes. Based on data some transitioning, expanding and commanding students 0  are serviced during math. The commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL services. For the stand alone model the ENL teachers plan lessons based on the content areas and the strategies they need to accomplish their goals. The groups consist of two grade bands in each group with entering and emerging students. During each stand alone session the students are then further broken apart into subgroups based on proficiency levels, F & P levels and/or skills deficient that are being focused on. Additionally formative assessments (informal reading assessments, teacher observations, conference notes and unit assessments) are also reviewed and used for targeted instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL teachers are certified to teach English as a New Language. The ENL teachers, with the assistance of the Principal and Assistant Principal, create a schedule based on the mandated hours of service required for the updated proficiency levels. Both Ms. Hanrahan and Ms. Sousa provide integrated and stand alone services. Ms. Hanrahan and Ms. Sousa provide 180 minutes of integrated ENL services to the entering, emerging, transitioning and expanding students. They provide 90 minutes of integrated services to the commanding students. The additional 180 minutes of ENL services is provided to the entering and emerging students using the stand alone ENL model. ENL services are implemented as per the CR. Part 154.2 regulations. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Within the ENL program, both Ms. Hanrahan and Mrs. Sousa create lessons based on the Common Core State Standards that align with the units of instruction. Within the ENL program as well as throughout the classrooms, content is made understandable through many strategies. Some of the strategies we use are visuals, cognates, gesturing, shades of meaning, prefix/suffix walls, differentiated groups and technology (videos, Ipads,etc..). In all classrooms content specific vocabulary, site word walls and visuals are evident. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Some classroom teachers and ENL providers encourage the students to speak, read and write in their native language. If available, students are partnered with other native language speakers to support their learning. Also, Ipads and computers are used for translations. In addition, we will also provide picture thesauruses. Furthermore, we utilize an over the phone translation service and staff members to provide home language support regularly. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a.Currently, we do not have any SIFE students. If there are indications that the student is a SIFE, then the identification process will be conducted. We will administer the oral interview questionnaire and the LENS. b. Newcomers are provided with many scaffolds to help them work towards meeting the Common Core State Standards. For example, peer tutoring is extremely resourceful. During all subjects at different times, students are partnered with each other based on their language needs. For writing, students are provided with a variety of graphic organizers and sentence frames. To encourage clearer sentence structure students are provided with speaking prompts. Also, students are 1  encouraged to read, write and speak in their native language to continue to build upon their skills and as a way to assess their knowledge. We also have a prepared Newcomer Toolkit that is designed to help families and teachers support our Newcomer students with a variety of tools such as: vocabulary builder, pictures, alphabet chart, and websites. c.ENLs that are developing are provided with many scaffolds to supplement the Common Core based lessons. Some examples are cognates in all subject areas. In addition, a variety of vocabulary building strategies are used such as connecting Tier 1 and Tier II words and visuals. Furthermore, strategies taught in literacy are reinforced through guided reading. d.N/A e.Our former ENLs are mostly placed in classrooms with current ENLs. While conducting integrated ENL lessons, the ENL teacher provides scaffolds and small group instruction to support their needs. The testing coordinator, Ms. Hasweh, is aware of the testing accommodations for ELLs two years after passing the NYSESLAT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ENL teachers and classroom teachers co-teach and plan carefully with instructional strategies, scaffolds and differentiation to make sure they are meeting the demands and rigor of the CCLS. Most teachers have been trained with UDL strategies. The school ensures that all ELL-SWD receive appropriate program mandated by their IEPs. Some of the speech teachers are bilingual and provide special education support services to ELL students. Teachers integrate technology to support instruction. Some of the online resources are provided in both their native language and English. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Decisions for SWD-ELLs are carefully attained through the IEP team and the ENL teachers. Instruction is modified to meet their learning styles in order to achieve their goals. SWD-ELLs are then placed in the least restrictive academic setting which allows them to best achieve their goals. To attain English proficiency the ENL teachers provide integrated ENL in the least restrictive classroom setting. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Through our Inquiry Team, we implemented a Response to Intervention (RTI) program at our school for students, including ELLs. Tier one intervention was conducted by the child's homeroom teacher in the classroom based on the results of schoolwide assessments. Tier two intervention is provided by the ENL teacher. Tier three intervention was provided outside of the regular class time. Although the language of instruction is always English for students in the ENL program, translation support in home language is provided as needed. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on data, last year we deemed it necessary to create Impact Teams. Impact Teams meet to analyze data and plan strategic lessons. We will continue to align and modify our ENL instruction to meet the demands of the CCLS, NYSESLAT and include additional UDL strategies. We will continue to focus on balancing informational and literary text, building knowledge in the disciplines, the staircase of complexity, text based answers, writing from sources and academic language. We will continue to use formative and summative assessments to monitor the ELLs progress. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS are afforded equal access to all school programs by the school making all programs open and available to all students. Accessible School Day Programs planned for upcoming school year: -Literacy Inc. Reading Buddies 2  -Creative Connections -Operation Respect -NYPD Too Good For Drugs The Title III Success Academy Program will run on Thursdays from December-May. The transitioning and expanding students will be invited. We selected this group because after reviewing our data we noticed that the majority of students are these proficiency levels. The program will focus on building listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Also, students in grades first through fifth grade will be invited to attend a NYS grant after school program run by United Activities Unlimited (UAU). UAU is an after school program that is conducted every day. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Every classroom is equipped with a Smart Board. The classrooms have been equipped with new laptops that are accessible to all students. All teachers and students have iPads that can be used to gather information and visuals during small group instruction. Other instructional materials are FOSS, Ready Gen, Expeditionary Learning, School-Wide Enrichment Model and Go Math. Go Math has many interactive lessons available for the students use on the computers/Smart Board including Spanish versions on the computer. Also, teachers use ReadingA-Z.com, RazKids, Smart Exchange, Brainpop and ReadWriteThink.org. ReadingA-Z.com has leveled books that teachers use for native language support. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In ENL, native language support is delivered by providing home communication and instructional materials, such as bilingual dictionaries, bilingual thesauruses and bilingual books in their language. Teachers use reading A-Z.com to access bilingual texts with questions on their different levels. In addition we access many resources in all different languages on EngageNY. Furthermore, students are encouraged to communicate, in their native language, with each other orally or in writing. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of the instructional materials we use and the instructional approaches we follow are appropriate for the developmental stages of kindergarten through fifth grade students. ELLs are grouped together in mostly one classroom to enable integrated ENL service. The stand alone ENL services are provided with no more than a two grade span per group. The ENL teachers scaffold and differentiate rigorous grade level texts. Our ELLs are given the tools to access grade level texts and are expected to perform at their proficiency level. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In May, we had kindergarten orientation in order to be prepared for September. In August, we will host a Back To School Fair to inform parents of learning opportunities in the community. The parent coordinator will hold a series of parent workshops during the course of the school year. There is synergy among our bilingual parent coordinator, schools counselor, PTA president and teachers in order to involve all ELLs and parents in activities throughout the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? n/a 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 3  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teachers, special education and common branch teachers attend professional development sessions offered by the Staten Island Borough Field Support Center and DELLSS. One of the ENL teachers participated in a series of math professional development sessions. She attended the first session on October 11th which was hosted by the Borough Field Support Center. The next professional development, offered by DELLS, she attended was on October 20th and titled “Scaffolding Instruction in Elementary Mathematics for English Language Learners”. The third session, also hosted by DELLS, was on November 10th. During other professional work time and Impact Team meetings teachers plan and analyze work with their colleagues to develop effective units to help all students succeed. Teachers participate in action research to enhance their professional expertise. They also build their capacity in their understanding of NYS Common Core State Standards by participating in school professional development sessions focused on CCLS. Some of the professional developments are hosted by the ENL teachers in the building. Furthermore, P.S.74 will be getting instructional focus and support from the Borough Field Support Center. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Teachers will be reflecting on ways to increase student independence in and out of the classroom. In order to prepare students teachers align all lessons with the Common Core State Standards. This information will be used as a guide to and support students emotionally, socially and academically. In addition, the school will provide teachers and students the opportunity to inter-visit a middle school and have conversations with teachers regarding their expectations for middle school ELLs. Students receive invitations from various middle schools for their open house. We will be conducting ELL specific professional developments for staff members so that 15% of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition, content instruction and a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies. ENL teachers will attend a minimum of 50% of the required professional development hours engaging in topics such as language acquisition in core content area instruction. Also including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. ENL teachers will maintain copies of all professional development workshop agendas and attendance sheets. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Letters will be sent home to invite parents to participate in individual meetings to address the goals of the ENL program. The meetings will be held during the parent engagement time from 2:45-3:20. We will discuss the child's language development progress and needs in content areas. If needed, translators will be available. 4  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator, Evelyn Rodriguez, has been involved in many parental programs for the FLES learning community. Parent involvement is a fundamental facet of our student's achievement. We will involve parents in the following ways to support higher achievement for ELLs. 1. Parents are strongly encouraged to meet with teachers during Parent Teacher Conferences as well as the Tuesdays set aside for parent involvement. Translation is provided to ensure parent communication is supported. 2. In October/November, the Parent Coordinator will conduct activities focused around each of the 7 Habits. These activities will be ongoing throughout the year. All ENL parents will be encouraged to participate in these workshops and activities.minister a parent survey in which she will gather information about parent interests to plan future workshops. At the end of the year a reflection sheet is completed by the parents in which they express their opinions, suggestions and concerns about workshops held during the school year. 3. Notifications of events, meetings or updates are sent home and translated by the parent coordinator and ENL teachers via fliers, letters and family calendars. In addition, phone blasts for events in the school are in their home language. Translation services are always provided as needed. 4. The Staten Island Community Partnership Program will sponsor an eight week program titled “My Hero and Me” fatherhood program. 5. The Back To School Family Day will be held in August at P.S.74. Many community based organizations will attend. They will provide literature and resources on immigration, education, free blood screenings and other resourceful topics. 6. Teachers do presentations about curriculum and instruction. We strive to address the needs of our parents by using feedback we gather during FALP. The parent coordinator files all agendas, sign-in sheets and resource copies for all parent engagement sessions. 7. The parent coordinator, Mrs. Rodriguez, will invite families to a program titled "Cookshop for Families". The program will meet one time per month for the duration of five months. 8. The principal will hold "Coffee and Chat" meetings every other month during the school day for parents. During this time the principal will engage in conversations with parents about their interests. The principal will use the information to plan future workshops for the parents. 9. The annual Parent Fair will be held in March. It is a day of fun and learning for both parents and their children. Parents and students will be engaged in academic and social workshops. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. We plan to implement a variety of parental involvement during the Title III Program. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Nicole Reid-Christopher, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P. S. 74 ~ Future Leaders School DBN: 31R074 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Nicole Reid- Christopher Principal Hanin Hasweh Assistant Principal Evelyn Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Wanda Sousa, Christine Hanraha N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Vanessa Herrera School Counselor N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Na Other na Other na Other na 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 6/26/18 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R074 School Name: Future Leaders Elementary School Superintendent: Vincenza Gallas The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Evelyn Illas-Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As parents come in to the main office to register their child we are able to assess language preferences for both written and oral communication through the greeting and enrollment interview. If an office staff member is unfamiliar with the language, then we point to the “Language I Speak Card” and get a bilingual staff member to assist. If we are unable to locate a staff member that speaks the language, we call the T & I Language Line for over the phone translation. Also, during the registration process we provide LEP parents with emergency cards translated into Spanish, our second most common preferred language. In addition, we also provide the Home Language Identification Survey Part III. On this document they identify their preferred language of communication. We enter the LEP parent's written and oral language preference into ATS and add it to the adult preferred language report. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English-61.44% English English English English-60.5% Spanish Arabic Chinese Spanish Arabic Chinese Spanish-33.86% Arabic-3.45% Chinese-0.31% Spanish Arabic Chinese Spanish-34.48% Arabic-3.45% Chinese-0.63% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School Calendars Monthly basis- September 2018 until June 2018. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents are translated within the school by staff on a monthly basis. 9  Parent Teacher Conference invitations Emergency Blue Cards Grading and Scoring Policy Sept., Nov. 2018 Mar., May 2019 Documents are translated by the school staff. Sept. 2018 and as needed throughout the year This is an accessible DOE document that has already been translated. Sept. 2018 and as needed throughout the year Documents are translated into other languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Family Curriculum Night-9/17/18 Family Curriculum Night interpretation service(s)? Teachers and other staff members support interpretation for families. In addition, teachers are provided with a phone number for over-the-phone interpretation services. Dads Take Your Child to School Day Dads take your child to school-9/18/18 Teachers and other staff members support interpretation for families. Coffee & Chat with Ms. Hasweh Coffee and Chat with Ms. Hasweh throughout the year Parent Coordinator provides interpretation support. Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Teacher Conferences-11/15/18, 3/14/19, 5/15/19 Teachers and other staff members support interpretation for families. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use a telephone call system that translates messages for parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 0  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All chancellor's regulations are shared with staff at the beginning of the year. Every staff member has access to hard or soft copies of regulation A-663. Our Language Access Coordinator makes all needed resources available for all staff members. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Multilingual Welcome Signs are posted at the entrance to the school building. These signs make parents aware of the translation and interpretation services that are available. In addition, all new students receive the Parents Bill of Rights. Extra Parents Bills of Rights are posted in different languages on a bulletin board on the first floor. Furthermore, the Language ID Guide is stored in the main office. The school safety agent directs LEP parents to the main office to identify the supports that are needed in their preferred language. Also, a Parent Guide to Language Access is given to parents to use when they are in the school building for school functions and parent teacher conferences. In addition, Common Core parent information is posted on a bulletin board in different languages. The parents are encouraged to take the information home. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During registration parents receive the Language Preference Form. On this form, the parents indicate the language they want to communicate in oral and written form. Translations are provided in the preferred language, based on the information received on the Language Preference Form. 1 
