 31R080 School Name: THE MICHAEL J. PETRIDES SCHOOL Principal: JOANNE BUCKHEIT   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Michael J. Petrides School 31R080 School Number (DBN): Pre K, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 9, 10, 11, 12 715 Ocean Terrace 718 815-0186 Phone Number: 718 556-1994 Fax: Joanne Buckheit jbuckhe@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Joanne Buckheit Alan Doctor April Sinclair Gary Giordano NA Claire Hasson Matthew Ballesteros NA District Information Geographical District: 31 Superintendent’s Office Address: Anthony Lodico Superintendent: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island New York alodico@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 420-5657 Phone Number: (718) 420-5677 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Kevin Moran FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 715 Ocean Terrace, Staten Island New York Kmoran2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (212) 374-4252 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Joanne Buckheit Alan Doctor April Sinclair Claire Hasson Matthew Ballesteros Maria Cirillo Adrienne Mikulka Toni Molloy *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Elementary School Parent Member/ Elementary School Parent Member/Middle School Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lisa Ruiz Nicole O'Connor Laura Kennedy Phyllis Magliocco Jen Brancaccio Gary Giordano Suaana Held FrancaWilson Member/ Middle School Parent Member/High School Parent Member/High School Parent Member/Elementary School Teacher Member/Elementary School Teacher Member/ Middle School Teacher Member/ Middle School Teacher Member/ High School Teacher Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview The Michael J. Petrides School is a seamless Pre K through 12 school committed to creating an environment for learning that nurtures the "whole child" - mind, body and spirit. Teachers, parents, administrators and support staff collaborate to provide an education that celebrates the diversity of our students and recognizes the individuality and creativity of each child. Using alternative strategies of a laboratory environment, we integrate the art into a rigorous   interdisciplinary curriculum and engage students in active learning, develop self-esteem and promote literate, creative, life-long learners. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. As a Pre K through 12 school, we recognize the enormous responsibility of (likely) providing a child’s entire (pre-college) education. The uniqueness of our school allows us to develop a 14 year relationship with our students and long-term partnership with their parents. Our collective goal is to prepare students for college and career. We are fortunate to see our students, who enter as 4 year olds, learn and grow, receive college acceptances and realize their potential as young adults. Our staff recognizes that we have 14 years to help a student earn a high school diploma. Our school-wide philosophy has evolved from our original goal of: a high school diploma for every student – to: a college acceptance for each student – to: ensuring that our graduates have the skills and stamina to sustain four years of college. Our partnerships with community based organizations include: American Ballroom Theater, Audubon Society, College of Staten Island, Garden to Classroom Program, Kingsborough College Now program, Police Athletic League, Public School Athletic League, Peer Health Exchange, St. John's University and Richmond University Medical Center. These affiliations allow us to provide a variety of co and extra curricula activities for our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Data shows that our Students with Disabilities are not performing at levels commensurate with their peers. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our strength, as noted in the Framework for Great Schools is "Collaborative Teachers". The following elements were noted as strong areas:  Quality of professional development (4.08)    Peer collaboration (4.63) School commitment (3.67) Innovation and Collective Responsibility (3.69) A key area identified as needing improvement is personal attention and support for students. Our school-wide focus on formative assessment, including self and peer assessment will help ensure that all students are assessment capable learners. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 31R080 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1313 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 57 56 23 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 182 162 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 47.0% % Attendance Rate 39.5% % Reduced Lunch 1.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 23.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 42.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.5 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 56.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 89% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 95% 90% 89.1% 22.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES YES YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES NO YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A YES N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A NO N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 144 135 2 93.1% 6.3% 28.5% 21.2% 8.7% 3.7% 4 10% 4.1 50.1% 72% 92% 92% 87.4% 45% N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the past three years, our students have shown positive growth in meeting or exceeding the standards in both English Language Arts and Mathematics. Spring 2018 state test results (for students in grades 3 through 8) show: 53.8% of students scoring Level 3 or 4 in ELA and 47.8% of students scoring Level 3 or 4 in Math. Quality Report reveals: School leaders and faculty ensure that curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and strategically integrate the instructional shifts. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data. Student responses to the School Survey identify the following area for improvement:  feedback to students Our school-wide Instructional Focus is to strengthen formative assessment, including self and peer assessment, across grade levels and subject areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2  1. By June 2019, all students will demonstrate progress towards college/career readiness as measured by a 10 % increase the number of students (grades 3 through 8) scoring Level 3 or 4 on NYS English Language Arts assessment, 90% of high school juniors will score 75 or better on English Regents exam, demonstrating college readiness. 2. By June 2019, all students will demonstrate progress towards college/career readiness as measured by a 10% increase in the number of students (grades 3 through 8) scoring Level 3 or 4 on NYS Math assessment, 70% of high school juniors will have scored 70 or better on the Common Core Algebra Regents exam, demonstrating college readiness. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Targeted Professional Development provided for teachers working on grade level Impact Teams using student data/work samples tied to focus standards in ELA and Math. Teachers will evaluate the work using a variety of protocols: Evidence/Analysis/Action, Case Studies, Micro-teaching, Lesson Studies and Evidence Walks Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers Targeted Professional Development to provide ongoing support aligned to formative assessment including self and peer assessment Teachers Targeted Professional Development on Close Reading Strategies Teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Consultant Paul Bloomberg Assistant Principal, Lead Teachers, Universal Literacy Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents as Partners Meetings: Regularly scheduled workshops, providing opportunities for parents to engage with instructional staff to ensure an understanding of our academic expectations and provide tips for parents to support the work at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.    Substitute teachers will be hired to cover teachers attending on-site and off-site Professional Development sessions throughout the school year. Impact Teams will analyze student data/work samples tied to focus standards in ELA and Math. Teachers will evaluate the work using a variety of protocols: Evidence/Analysis/Action, Case Studies, Micro-teaching, Lesson Studies and Evidence Walks. Special Education teachers will be programmed to include small group instruction for identified at-risk students  Consultant Paul Bloomberg will be contracted to provide professional development and coaching sessions to Early Childhood teachers (grades K through 2). 4   Consultant Lori Cook will be contracted to provide professional development including Mathematics unit and lesson planning with Elementary School teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmarks: ● By February 2019, Complex Text Assessment data will show 58% of students scoring at Level 3 or 4 ● By February 2019, Math exemplar results will show 52% of students scoring at Level 3 or 4 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Monthly Complex Text Assessment results and Math exemplar performance tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Analysis of data, both hard and soft, in the area of Supportive Environment shows that staff, students and parents agree our school provides a safe and welcoming environment for members of our learning community. Learning Environment Survey results show that students (and their parents) acknowledge that they are being prepared well for the expectations of the next grade level. Suspension Data support safe school environment. School maintained low suspension rates (for the 2017-2018 school year): Principal Suspensions: 17 Superintendent’s Suspensions: 12 While teacher responses to Learning Environment Survey questions in this area identify social/emotional support as a strength, student responses to the survey highlight personal attention and support as an area needing improvement. Student performance data shows our most at-risk (sub group) students, including Students With Disabilities and Economically Disadvantaged.) are performing at levels below their peers. Specifically, results of (2017) State ELA exam: Gen. Ed. students Sp. Ed. students Grade: performing at Level 3 or 4 performing at Level 3 or 4 3 4 5 6 7 8 47/66 41/70 33/69 32/70 55/66 54/71 9/25 12/31 3/27 3/31 6/31 5/19 6  Results of (2017) State Math exam: Grade: 3 4 5 6 7 8 Gen. Ed. students Sp. Ed. students performing at Level 3 or 4 49/65 44/70 23/69 34/70 38/66 NA performing at Level 3 or 4 8/25 9/31 3/27 4/30 0/31 NA Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, students with disabilities (grades 3 through 8) will demonstrate progress towards college/career readiness as measured by a 5% increase in those achieving at grade level as measured by NYS ELA and Math assessments. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Targeted Professional Development for teachers working on Impact Teams using student data/work samples tied to focus standards in ELA and Math. Teachers Targeted Professional Development for ICT partnership teachers focused on effective team teaching models ICT Orton-Gillingham Training for secondary Special Education teachers partner teachers Special Education Teachers Targeted Professional Development on Math Practice Standards Teachers Sept. 2018 through June 2019 Sept. 2018 through June 2019 October 2018 October-May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coach, Core Collaborative Consultants Principal, Assistant Principal, Lead teachers OG Consultants Borough Field Support Center, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents as Partners Meetings: Regularly scheduled workshops, providing opportunities for parents to engage with instructional staff to ensure an understanding of our academic expectations and provide tips for parents to support the work at home. Workshop topics have included: Understanding Close Reading of Complex Text, Analyzing Annotations, Understanding PSAT Results and Navigating Collegeboard.com. Our Parents as Partners series has also included occasions for parents to join in classroom activities, for example: Parents as Lab Partners (rat dissection) and Family Math Games. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.   Substitute teachers will hired to cover teachers attending Professional Development sessions Lead teachers (and model) classrooms will provide learning opportunities for colleagues 8  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmarks: ● By February 2019, Complex Text Assessment data will show 58% of students scoring at Level 3 or 4 ● By February 2019, Math exemplar results will show 52% of students scoring at Level 3 or 4 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Complex Text assessment and Math exemplar performance tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Collaborative Teachers survey results show this element of the framework as a strength for our school. Our PROSE designation allows school leaders and faculty to collaborate and make school based decisions in the best interest of our learning community. Data shows the following strengths:  Teachers are actively trying to improve their teaching, and that they take responsibility for improving the school  Teachers feel responsible that all students learn  The principal, teachers and staff collaborative to make the school run effectively Areas for improvement:  Teachers willing to take risks to make the school better  Teachers eager to try new ideas Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of classroom teachers will have participated in Teacher Learning Groups involving professional learning opportunities including sharing best practices and inter-visitations - encouraging teachers to try new ideas. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers will be assigned to a Teacher Learning Group (TLG). Members will identify a TLC facilitator. Classroom teachers Teacher Learning Groups identify a problem of practice, and share experiences and ideas on the topic, through classroom visits and regularly scheduled meetings Teachers Lead Teacher (TLG Facilitator) TLC Facilitators September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents as Partners Meetings: Regularly scheduled workshops, providing opportunities for parents to engage with instructional staff to ensure an understanding of our academic expectations and provide tips for parents to support the work at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitutes will be hired to cover teachers attending Professional Development sessions   Coverage will be arranged to allow inter-visitations among TLG participants Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  By February, 2019, there will be an increase in inter-component collaboration and sharing of best practice as documented in minutes of TLC meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting minutes from Teacher Learning Group meeting Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher Influence is identified as a strength, with a score of 4.20 noted on the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report - specifically, 97% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders. Yet, only 84% of teachers say that it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision. All teachers will be assigned to a (mixed component/department) Teacher Learning Group involving professional learning opportunities including sharing best practices and intervisitations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, one third of the teaching staff (29 out of 85 teachers) will have served in a leadership role, including teacher team facilitator or turn key trainer. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher team work will expand to include grade level/department Impact Teams. Identified Teacher Leads will participate in professional development with the Core Collaborative four times throughout the school year to support the work. The focused training sessions will include on-site coaching by Paul Bloomberg. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers Assistant Principal All teachers will participate in (mixed level/department) Teacher Learning Group throughout the school year Teachers Oct. 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, TLG Facilitators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents as Partners Meetings: Regularly scheduled workshops, providing opportunities for parents to engage with instructional staff to ensure an understanding of our academic expectations and provide tips for parents to support the work at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher teams will meet during scheduled Common Planning Time and/or Professional Learning Time on  Monday afternoons Identified Impact Team facilitators will continue to participate in focused professional development with Paul Bloomberg's Core Collaborative.  TLG Facilitators will lead the work of Teacher Learning Groups  Substitutes will be hired to cover teachers attending Professional Development sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 4  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, professional development documentation (including monthly PD calendar, training session agendas, meeting minutes) will show that 33% of teachers have served in a leadership role (facilitator or trainer). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Professional Development documentation (monthly PD calendar, training agendas, meeting minutes). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, 93% of respondents confirm that parents/guardians are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school. And, 89% of parents agree that teachers work closely with families to meet students needs. A Parent Engagement Calendar is generated and published monthly, advertising opportunities for parents to visit school and participate in the learning process. Our Parent Engagement offerings include: Parents as Partners Meetings: Regularly scheduled workshops, providing opportunities for parents to engage with instructional staff to ensure an understanding of our academic expectations and provide tips for parents to support the work at home. Workshop topics have included: Understanding Close Reading of Complex Text, Analyzing Annotations, Understanding PSAT Results and Navigating Collegeboard.com. Our Parents as Partners series has also included occasions for parents to join in classroom activities, for example: Parents as Lab Partners (rat dissection) and Family Math Games. Sip and Share Events: Monthly affairs that allow parents to meet for (coffee and) informal discussion with key members of the school staff. Featured guests have included: our Guidance Counselor, Food Service Manager and Kitchen Staff (parents were treated to a school lunch buffet), High School Assistant Principal and our Arts teachers. Only 78% of families say they are well informed by the communication they receive from their school. Our School Based Option for flexibility in Parent Engagement time will allow us to plan additional afternoon, evening and weekend events for parents and more meaningful opportunities for teachers to meet with parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in 'meaningful communication' as measured by parent responses to the school's Learning Environment Survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Monthly "Parent Engagement Calendar" will be developed to list and advertise planned parent engagement activities  Parents as Partners Meetings: Continue to offer opportunities for parents to engage with their child in the classroom and participate in student learning activities to ensure parent understanding of CCLS expectations. Sip and Share events will be scheduled to allow parent access to key staff members Social media, including school website, Twitter and Instagram will be used to share school news/events/happenings   Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents Parents Parents Parents Sept. 2018 through June, 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers Sept.2018 through June 201 September 2018 through June 2019 School Staff School Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 7  Parents as Partners Meetings: Regularly scheduled workshops, providing opportunities for parents to engage with instructional staff to ensure an understanding of our academic expectations and provide tips for parents to support the work at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Classroom Teachers will host Parents a Partners Workshops, monthly  Extended Day Parent Engagement time will be leveraged to offer additional Parents as Partners meetings  Approved SBO allows for flexibility in Parent Engagement time to allow staff to plan activities/events at more convenient times for parents (including evening and weekend events) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February, 2019, school-based, school-wide survey results will show 83% of parents say that benefit from communication provided by school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-based, school-wide Parent Engagement Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Data reveals students performing below grade level standard Mathematics Data reveals students performing below grade level standard Science Data reveals students performing below grade level standard Social Studies Data reveals students performing below grade level standard Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Guided Reading sessions, Fundations Targeted Skills Instruction Regents Review sessions Targeted Skills Instruction Regents Review sessions Additional time with curriculum Targeted Skills Instruction Regents Review classes Additional time with curriculum Targeted Skills Instruction Regents Review classes Small group During school Small group During school Small group Small group Small group Small group Small group During school, after school After-school and weekends During school, after school After-school and weekends During school Small group During school Small group Small group After-school and weekends During school Small group During school Small group Small group After-school and weekends During school 9  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Attendance data Student performance data Student progress data Additional time with curriculum Social Emotional Learning Guidance Lessons (including Character Trait of the month) Advisor-Advisee sessions conducted Phoenix Project: at-risk boys group Whole class During school Small Group During school Small Group During school and after school 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. NA Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1 Providing school supplies, school uniforms as needed for students$4208 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $4208 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 4  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Michael J. Petrides School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Michael J. Petrides School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Michael J. Petrides, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 8  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 9  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act ( ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 0  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 1  ● always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 31 School Name Michael J. Petrides School Borough Staten Island School Number 80 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Joanne Buckheit Coach None ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jean Kashanian Teacher/Subject Area Christina Sconzo/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Claudia Kambouris/E.C. Related-Service Provider Meghan Caffrey/Speech Superintendent Anthony Lodico Assistant Principal BettyAnn Souffrin Coach None School Counselor Sheren Attal Parent Lisa DiBenedetto Parent Coordinator None Field Support Center Staff Member Nilda Kraft Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1323 Total number of ELLs 22 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 1.66% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fountas & Pinnell, TCRWP, complex text assessments and interim assessments are used to assess early literacy skills. These assessments provide us with information where our ELL's are struggling and need help; such as reading comprehension, writing, inferencing. This data provides teachers with information to plan for individualized instruction for areas of need. For Grades K and 1, the data shows that students need more instruction regarding letter sound relationships and picture/word relationships. This work is being done in shared reading and guided reading. In grade 2, vowel clusters such as aw,ie, and controlled r are struggles. This is being addressed through guided reading and word study work. In grades 3-5, decoding is stronger and students are able to answer literal questions. Teachers are working on inferential questions, retelling, and understanding main idea as well as building stamina and fluency. For middle school and high school, writing is an area of weakness. Teachers are focusing on organizing ideas using graphic organizers and other tools to help students form quality 4  writing pieces. To inform our instructional plan, we have committed to focusing on the common core standards as our guide for planning, assessment, and all student activities. This focus will ensure rigorous instruction and ultimately raise the level of our ELL population. Our ELLs benefit from the various assessments in that they are appropriately placed in small groups for targeted instruction. This allows for teachers to both closely monitor progress and offer immediate support where necessary. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support this effort, we have made assessments and subsequent results a priority in our school. Teachers are given adequate time to both assess and analyze the data. During common planning time, classroom and ENL teachers collaborate to determine best practices. Coaches help in the implementation of various strategies and by providing appropriate materials. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Based on teacher-made assessments, unit tests, TCRWP, Fountas & Pinnell and NYSITELL/NYSESLAT data we evaluate the success of ELLs. We aim for consistent progression of language acquisition for all our ELLs. ELLs are invited to all afterschool programs and/or tutoring offered in the school. Students are offered Academic Intervention Services, when available, and are seen regularly in small groups during the school day by the ESL teacher and the classroom teacher. Schoolwide instructional team regularly reviews ELL sub-group data to ensure that our instructional focus encompasses the needs of our ELLs and reflects the current data of the students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data has been gathered, the findings are brought to the attention of school leadership. School leadership recognizes that for ELLs to communicate effectively, all modalities of language acquisition must be addressed. We use researched based strategies to enhance instruction. The CCLS guide our rigorous instruction. ELLs receive appropriate support and scaffolding techniques to make content comprehensible. We're also diligently working to support our SWDs by using several intervention strategies. F status teachers push-in to classrooms and work with small groups where instruction method is modified to meet the needs of the students. Remediation, practice and reinforcement occur seamlessly. Our related service providers are also involved in the intervention process. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Based on assessment data, the school creates small group instruction and AIS teachers work with those individual students. Tier 1 intervention is provided to all students in Grades K-2. Grades 3-8 are provided with regular Academic Intervention Services. Fundations is the program of choice for students in grades K-2. Several AIS and special education teachers of grades 3-8 have been trained in Orton-Gillingham. These Wilson-based methodologies are used in small group and whole group for ELLs as well as other students as our Response to Intervention. Teachers engage in data analysis during their professional development time on Mondays from 2:20-3:40pm. Student work is reviewed and instructional plans are made to meet the diverse needs of the students in each class. The ENL teachers play an integral role in this discussion and this planning. Progress monitoring occurs through observation as well as formal assessments. This type of layered intervention and frequent monitoring aligns with the RTI frameworks. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 5  We use the NYSITELL (for our new students) to determine level of language development and plan accordingly. The previous year's NYSESLAT, ELA and Math assessments and Regents exam data aids in preparing our teachers to differentiate instruction. Our ENL teachers offer support by sharing effective, research based strategies such as scaffolding of academic language, modeling, rephrasing, repetition and appropriate wait time. Clear, concise instructions, directions, and expectations are stressed. Our ELLs are involved in deciding whether they have met the posted "Success Criteria". The RLAT is used to analyze progress over 3 years in each modality on the NYSESLAT. This data gives us a snapshot of each ELLs strengths as well as where we need to focus our attention to improve their skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our programs are fluid and flexible. We disseminate our findings during common planning time and/or through written correspondence. All teachers of ELLs are made aware of each child's language developmental stage and how this impacts their learning. We discuss the most beneficial strategies for each stage of language acquisition and which responses are appropriate and may be anticipated. Our teachers know the challenges ELLs face and are sensitive to their needs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Based on our parent selection form responses, we offer Freestanding ENL. Student mandates are served based on their proficiency level and consist of stand alone and integrated instruction. For stand alone, students are grouped across 1 to 2 grade levels and are pulled out of their regular classroom for strategy and small group instruction. For integrated instruction, the students are grouped with other ESL students as well as non-ESL students in a class with an ENL teacher and a classroom teacher. The integrated co-teaching class offers students an opportunity to work with their English proficient peers with the support of the ENL teacher using ESL methodolgy. Again our groups are flexible and fluid. They vary depending on our observations of what works best, at a specific time, for each child. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL teacher follows instructional minutes based on the guidelines in the ELL Policy and Reference Guide. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers collaborate to determine the best times to push in and pull out. The ENL teachers collaborate with administration and the programmer to ensure that programmatic mandates are met while considering an instructionally sound schedule for the students. All data is entered into STARS classroom to account for time spent pushing in and pulling out. As per the English Language Learner Policy and Reference Guide, there are 5 proficiency levels (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, Commanding) for ELLS based on the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT. These particular levels determine the amount of time in a stand alone or integrated setting. The stand alone instruction develops English Language skills. The integrated ENL instruction builds English Language Arts through content area instruction. 6  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All instruction which is delivered in English Language Arts and other content areas meets the Common Core Learning standards. Classrooms follow the workshop model and offer students a variety of support based on learning needs. Core content is delivered in English and enhanced with Native Language. Our school only has Freestanding ENL as our program model. We provide instruction to emphasize language language acquisition. This instruction is delivered through both push in and pull out services. Our students are instructed using Common Core aligned materials and curriculum such as ReadyGen, Expeditionary Learning, GoMath, Envision, and teacher created materials. By using ESL strategies, such as modeling, scaffolding and peer collaboration, content becomes comprehensible. Our content specialists and coaches often attend workshops offered by the Office of English Language Learners. Also our ESL teacher collaborates with both the content area and classroom teacher to determine comprehension gaps. The ESL teacher can then address these issues during the ESL class by using visuals, rephrasing and same language tutors. We now also have specifically trained teachers pushing in to content area classes. They focus on ELLs and SWD to make sure content is comprehensible. Their ownership of these students not only encourages the development of academic language, but also fosters the students abilities to meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Current ELL research supports our use of video, hands on activity, extensive students discourse, and building on prior knowledge. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Classrooms with ELLs have bilingual and culturally diverse literacy materials in their libraries. ENL students are offered standardized testing materials in their home language as well as English. The Spanish Lab is adminitered. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Our plan for any future SIFE admits includes assessment of their needs, providing state mandated ESL periods, grouping based on language level, relevant materials and any other interventions deemed necessary. AID, After School Programs, providing a language buddy, reaching out to parents in their native language are all considered and implemented as needed. b. Newcomer - instruction is modified in collaboration with classroom teacher. Students are offered tools such as picture cues, modified reading materials, multi-sensory opportunities, phonics instruction, and extended time. Small group instruction is present in all classrooms and ELL students are integrated in these groups according to strengths and weaknesses. c. Developing students receive support from related services providers such as AIS and extended time. These students are also provided with small group instruction and individualized instruction based on strengths and weaknesses. Curriculum materials are differentiated based on particular skills needing to be mastered. d. Academic Intervention is provided to students who are considered long-term ELLs. These students are invited to all test preparation programs and additional support throughout the day. e. Students will receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction and extended time on standardized tests. Former ELLs benefit from the integrated model in that the ENL teacher can offer immediate support and feedback. Our commanding ELLs often surpass their native English speaking classmates in achievement. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We use books and materials from Pearson, Scott Foresman, Continental Press, Teachers College, Steckvaughn Reading Comprehension Series, Dictionaries, Audio Tapes, Websites, ESL Videos, Scaffolding Questions, Graphic Organizers and books in native languages. Multi-sensory approaches are used for all ELL-SWD students. Many of our Special Ed teachers are Orton-Gillingham trained and have turn keyed these methodologies to the other special ed teachers. These strategies help the students with phonemic awareness which support English language development. Visuals are implemented in all classrooms as a support to our ELLs. These strategies are geared to motivate and educate all learning styles. 7  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We provide an inclusive educational program. Our school has ICT classes from grades K-7. This setting offers Special ed students an opportunity to be in a general education classroom with the support of a special education teacher. Using flexible scheduling, students are able to move from a special ed setting to a general ed setting during the course of the day for subject areas when students show proficiency. They reap the benefits of peer tutoring, good language models and appropriate behavior models. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Based on the assessment data, the interventions we use to help differentiate instruction to all sub groups are small groups, AIS services and extensive input by the ENL teachers. Content area instruction is scaffolded by modeling, bridging, schema building and QTEL strategies. Content area teachers attend ENL professional development to not only learn research based strategies but to also become aware of how language development stages impact the comprehension of content concepts. Our F status teacher, literacy and math intervention specialists work with both ELLs and former ELLs in ELA, Math and content areas include small groups, differentiated instruction, and re-teaching in different modalities to assure that we reach our verbal, auditory and tactile-kinesthetic learners. Our workshop model provides ample opportunity for instruction, guidance, practice and review. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The new balance of stand alone and integrated ENL will improve our instruction for ELLs. Working on Language skills outside the classroom and working on content inside the classroom alongside their typical peers will expose the students to a richer educational experience. Classroom and content area teachers report that our ELLs are making progress and as such, we believe that our program of monitoring for comprehension, modifying instruction and materials and collaboration is effective. Our goal is for all ELLs to grasp the complexities of grade level content. We are considering the use of "language buddies" for our newcomer ELLs. Our middle and high school students who are proficient in both L1 and L2 will be matched with ENL students who would benefit from this experience. This may occur during class time, lunch and/or after school. We believe that along with the academic support our ELLs wil receive, they will also have a lens into their own successful future. Socialization opportunities are crucial for integration into the new, unknown environment. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We had no bilingual programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are invited to every activity in our school. Students invitations are sent home in the preferred language. Parent Meetings are offered monthly by the ENL teachers to support student academic learning. After school test preparation is offered for all standardized testing and supported by ENL teachers during the regular school day. Historically, most of our ELLs take part in these programs. Our ELLs participate in our on site after school PAL program, which offers homework help, enrichment activities, sports and time to socialize and practice language with their peers. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs have the use of technology such as Smartboards, laptops and IPads to assist in learning. Along with mandated common core materials for instruction and the use of dictionaries and glossaries to assist in learning. Our classroom libraries and school library contain bilingual literacy materials. The teacher of our computer lab has access to translated software for 8  newcomers. Starfall, Tumbler books, Flocabulary have proven beneficial for ELLs. We are building our non-fiction libraries with the National Geographic Reading Expeditions series which offers many visuals and clear, concise language to explain various content topics. We will begin to use the new Science Bilingual Digital Library offered by the DOE. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The home language of our students is celebrated and contributes positively to our diversity. Our ELLs have ample opportunity to take pride in their heritage during multi-cultural fairs, classroom history lessons, dress-up days, assembly programs, etc. Parents are often invited to attend and participate. In the integrated model the ENL teacher is prepared with bilingual materials (if necessary), visual aides, manipulatives and graphic organizers. Our multi-lingual staff is available to offer support as needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ESL students receive the required amount of support based on their educational needs (scores). Groups are made up of students across three grades or less. Students in our self-contained classes who are ELLs benefit from having their special ed teacher and ENL teacher in the classroom to support their needs. All ELL classroom teachers as well as related service providers meet with the ENL teacher to discuss the child's language developmental stage, next stage expectations and age appropriate lessons and materials. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ELLs have the use of technology such as Smartboards, laptops and IPads to assist in learning. Along with mandated common core materials for instruction and the use of dictionaries and glossaries to assist in learning. Our classroom libraries and school library contain bilingual literacy materials. The teacher of our computer lab has access to translated software for newcomers. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At registration, ELLs get a chance to meet their classroom teachers, ESL teacher, and Assistant Principal. Due to the nature of our school lottery, most seats are filled by mid October and there are very few, if any, newly enrolled students after that point. If transitioning is difficult, the guidance counselor will provide at risk couseling. Assistant Principal meets with newly enrolled students, including ELLs, on each grade level to ensure a smooth transition into the school. These advisor/advisee sessions are ongoing throughout the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In our school we offer Spanish and Italian language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 9  ESL teachers participate in professional development workshops such as common planning, faculty conferences, lunch and learns, instructional rounds, Danielson study groups on Common core aligned instruction, integrated co-teaching models, looking at student work, Danielson's Framework, guided reading, and more. Teachers in the school regularly turn-key information to colleagues who do not attend the training in person. This year, the teachers will attend ongoing professional development by Paul Bloomberg. In addition, the assistant principal will attend training offered by the Office of English Language Learners including Implementation of the new CR Part 154. Paraprofessionals will receive ongoing para training supported by the School Psychologists through a regular schedule of lunch and learns. Members of the School Assessment Team, Special Ed Teachers and related service providers attend monthly training supported by the Special Ed Liaison that focusing on SESIS, Least Restrictive Environment, meaningful interventions, writing IEPS, de-escalation, and behavioral support in the classrooms. Every month ENL teachers receive an email regarding upcoming professional development workshops along with mandated meetings they must attend. Our ENL teachers conduct professional development sessions on designated days and times. The topics range from identification of ELLs, to stages of language acquisition and their implications, to ENL methodologies, to cultural issues impacting learning to discriminating between SWD and ELLs. Our ENL teachers continue to attend professional development offered by the district and city offices. Our staff development often includes an ESL component where our ENL teacher supports the workshops presented by our literacy and Math coaches. We have also implemented "Lunch and Learn" and "Study Groups" with our ENL teacher. Our staff is trained in utilizing effective ENL strategies into daily activities, group lessons, content area instruction and assessments. Our entire staff, including principal, assistant principals, para-professionals, guidance counselor, oc cupational, physical and speech therapists and secretaries participate in on-going staff development sessions. ELL specific issues are addressed in workshops conducted by coaches, support specialists and SNL teachers. These sessions are held on staff development days and after school. ESL specific topics are also discussed during faculty conferences. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. On the first day of school the ESL student receives a buddy to help in transition as well as the ESL teacher introduces herself and helps students to get acclimated to new surroundings. As a PreK-12 school, transitioning is fluid. Students and parents are afforded many transition opportunities throughout their time at Petrides. As per CR Part 154 teachers receive a mandated amount of instruction during professional development. Attendance sheets and materials from workshops attended by ESL teachers are shared with the larger staff and kept by Assistant Principal and Principal. ENL teachers have and will attend trainings offered by the Department of ELLs and Student Support including LAP training, AMAO, and CR Part 154. Webinars, Lunch and Learn, Study Groups and inter-class visitations also facilitate acquiring the mandated professional development hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school provides individual meetings with parents of ELLs during the parent engagement time. The ENL teacher schedules face to face conferences or phone conferences if parent cannot meet in person. During these meetings, the ENL teacher arranges to have translators present or will use the translation unit. At these meeting the ENL teacher discusses the goals of the program, the child's progress, and language development needs. Translation is provided by qualified pedagogues or the DOE LTI Unit. Parents are able to meet with classroom teachers during parent teacher conferences. On Tuesday afternoons, parents are 0  able to meet with teachers to discuss child's progress and/or participate in Parent as Partner Workshops. In addition we now have meetings with each ELL parent to discuss child's progress. Parents are always welcome to speak to ESL teacher at any time to discuss concerns. All workshops will be provided in the preferred language as requested by the parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parents are invited to every school activity. We offer cooking workshops, reading with your child, author's teas, Parent as Partner Workshops, Assemblies, Arts Events, and various holiday workshops throughout the year. Translation services are available to parents if requested in the main office. There is a sign indicating languages a parent might request without requiring parents to speak. The office manager is responsible for informing the assistant principal of these requests. If a translator is available on site, the translator is immediately summoned to the office. ELL parents will have an ongoing opportunity on Tuesdays to meet with any of their child's teachers between the hours of 2:20pm-3:30pm. Our aim is to establish mutual trust and respect between ELL parents and our staff. The parents of ELL students are encouraged to not only become familiar with our school procedures but to also become active participants in school events. We hold informative orientation sessions in the fall for newly enrolled ELLs as well as continuing ELLs to discuss issues relevant to the upcoming school year (schedules, school events and meetings, expectations, calendar, etc.), and in spring for incoming enrolled kindergarten students and any new entrants. Additionally, in spring, parents are invited to learn about state exams and the requirements for their children. We provide translators as well as translated versions of various forms and letters. During parent orientation, administrators are introduced and a tour of the building is given. Our staff provides a warm, respectful and welcoming atmosphere. The NYC translations services are used to inform parents of mandated assessments and expectations. Our PTA is diverse and reaches out to the ELL parents in an effort to encourage membership. Most of our parents attend parent-teacher conferences because we provide translators for both the afternoon and evening conferences. ELL parents are encouraged to attend literacy and Math workshops given by our coaches. Our school website is available in nine different languages and provides important information about school events. Our parents are aware that translators are available at all events. Our school takes pride in our diversity and as such actively encourages parental involvement. This fosters a sense of community, common goals and sets education as a top priority for success. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Joanne Buckheit, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Petrides School DBN: 31R080 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Joanne Buckheit Title Principal BettyAnn Souffrin Assistant Principal None Parent Coordinator Jean Kashanian ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lisa DiBennedetto Parent Christina Sconzo/Special Ed Teacher/Subject Area Claudia Kambouris/E.C. Teacher/Subject Area None None Coach Coach Sheren Attal School Counselor Anthony Lodico Nilda Kraft Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 10/17/17 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 31R080 School Name: Michael J. Petrides School Superintendent: Anthony Lodico The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Assessment of oral interpretation and written translation needs occurs during registration when parents are present at school. Language Access Coordinator conducts a parent survey annually as well to esnure a correct and updated list is maintained. Pupil Accounting secretary regularly generates the RAPL report to ensure that all school forms are distributed based on the written language preference of the families and so that oral interpretations can be provided during family engagement activities. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Findings: Regarding oral interpretation and written translations, 57 students have families requesting Spanish, 13 students have families requesting Chinese, 10 students have families requesting Russian, 10 students have families requesting Polish, 9 students have families requesting Albanian, 4 students have families requesting Bengali, 4 students have families requesting Urdu, 3 students have families requesting Arabic, and 1 student for each Sinhalese, Punjabi, Vietnamese. The Language Access Coordinator maintains master list of translation needs. This list is shared with administration including assistant principals of each component. Classroom teachers are notified of the language needs of their students. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 5  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly (grade level) newsletter, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information, promotion letters, report cards, ENL entitlement letters, testing notifications, discipline code, Respect For All brochures, and Academic Intervention Service program letter. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Back to School Night (September), Parent Teacher Conferences (November, March), Family Information Night (May), Parents as Partners Meetings (monthly), Parent Engagement Sessions (every Tuesday 2:20-3:35) In addition, bilingual staff members are charged with assisting teachers in contacting families with interpretation needs. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 6  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will determine each family's primary spoken language within 30 days of enrollment. We will document the preferred language needs and assist families with written and oral communications by providing appropriate oral interpretation and written translations. The school will consider budgetary needs when planning for the school year to ensure funds for parent communication considering the primary spoken language. The school will provide a Language Access Coordinator to manage the needs of this population. We will provide these families with the Parent Bill of Rights which outlines their rights regarding Translation and Interpretation Services. We will visibly display signage to indicate that these services are available at our school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school has in place tools for parents to receive language services such as signage, trained staff ready to respond to parent language needs, updated blue cards, regular monitoring of the RAPL (Adult Preferred Language Report) and a trained Language Access Coordinator who will survey the parents to ensure high quality service of Translation and Interpretation needs. Parents will be notified in writing of their right to receive language services and directed to the NYCDOE website for translated information and forms. 7 
