 75X017 School Name: P.S. X017 Principal: MARLIN HOGGARD   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P 17X 307500012017 K-10 778 Forest Avenue (718) 665-5617 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 75X017 (718) 665-6372 Fax: Marlin Hoggard mhoggar@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Marlin Hoggard James Moore Andrea Goldman Marlin Hoggard N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Ketler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 1 st Avenue, New York, New York 10010 KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 802-1500 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   The Bronx Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 ZeregaAvenue Bronx, NY 10462 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Marlin Hoggard Noreen Kohler Andrea Goldman Mildred Toro N/A N/A N/A N/A Mary Peay Canice Arnold Elizabeth Carrion *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Elected Parent Member/ Elected parent Member/ Elected Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Martina Rivera Member/ Elected Parent Joan Carrig EboniSowell Member/ Elected UFT Member/Elected UFT Assistant Principal Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P 17X Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview P 17X will collaborate with parents and community to create a safe, supportive, nurturing environment which respects the individuality of our students and promotes the levels of rigorous, differentiated academic instruction that leads to successful college and career transitions.   P 17X Vision Statement The vision of P17X is to fulfill the fundamental purpose of helping all of our students reach high social-emotional and academic achievement. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P 17X is a site-based school with self-contained classes serving students with special needs with 441 students from kindergarten through grade 10. Students are housed at three elementary sites, one middle school site and a high school inclusion site initiated in the 2016-2017 school year. The school population comprises 38% Black, 53% Hispanic and 5% White. The student body includes 17% English language learners and 100% special education students. Male students account for 83% of the students enrolled and female students account for 17%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017-2018 was 87.3%. P17X is committed to facilitating the movement of its students with special needs to the least restrictive environment appropriate for each student and to provide a solid foundation for movement towards college and career readiness. Towards that end, the school has formed collaborative partnerships within its co-located school buildings and with the outside community. P17X has formed partnerships with SBAAM and APR, as well as with Stevenson High School, that provide P17X students the opportunity to participate in General Education classrooms with SETTs supports. For the 2018-2019 school year P17X will partner with General Education elementary school PS 43 to provide the same opportunity to elementary students. P17X has also formed partnerships with College Access for All as a means to expose students to the possibilities of college attendance, Urban Advantage as a means to utilize the unique resources of New York City as learning opportunities for both students and families and Fletcher's Place as a means to support phonics instruction for P17X elementary students via mentoring by P17X middle school students. For the 2018-2019 school year, P17X will participate in the Middle School Quality Initiative as part of our commitment to high expectations in literacy. The P17X school community also provides Academic Intervention Supports to students in both reading and math to further ensure their success in less restrictive settings and to further prepare them for college, careers and independence. Recognizing that strengthening teacher practice is a vital part of student success P17X supports a UFT Teacher Center for the purpose of ongoing Professional Learning. During the 2017-2018 school year, P17X formed collaborative partnerships with the Bronx Borough President to secure Reso A funding for technology improvements to prepare students for 21st century learning. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  P 17X serves students with Autism Spectrum Disorder, Emotional Disturbance, Speech and Language Impairment, Intellectual Disability and Other Health Impairments. The specific needs of these students include supports to access core curricula, crisis intervention teams and PBIS systems to support social, emotional, behavioral and management needs and speech and language and Ot/PT services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P17X made significant progress in all elements of the Framework for Great Schools during the past year. Analysis of data trends in current formative and summative assessments, Advance data and 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback indicate that progress was made most significantly in the following areas: Rigorous Instruction: P17X has a strong Common Core aligned curriculum. As noted in 2017-2018 feedback, curricula are strategically aligned to Common Core Learning standards and instructional shifts. Rigor and higher-order thinking skills are embedded in a coherent way across grades and subjects. Coherent curricula across grades and subjects are designed to promote college and career readiness for all students. An area of focus for the 2017-2018 school year was vocabulary development. Implementation of explicit vocabulary instruction in every classroom addressed the component of Rigorous Instruction to align practice and content to Common Core strategies within and across grades and resulted in gains of 804 points in Edperformance baseline to end of year reading scores. Vocabulary scores increased by 35% from baseline to end of year for standardized students and 12.5% for Alternate Assessment students. Area of focus: While reading and vocabulary levels showed significant improvement, student decoding skill levels across grade levels indicated that students would struggle to independently access rigorous grade level curriculum materials. Alternate Assessment student Fountas & Pinnell assessments indicated that 90% were below Level D and that 55% were at the very beginning level of Level A. IEP accommodations for standardized students indicated that 82% required that tests be read aloud. As a result, P17X is partnering with the Middle School Quality Initiative at the Middle School Level and will implement Fundations at the elementary level to address these learning gaps. Collaborative Teachers: Collaborative teachers at P17X were committed to student success and met daily to engage in protocol based collaboration that provided opportunities for them to develop, grow and learn from peers and experts. As noted in 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback, all teacher teams engage in Inquiry based, structured, professional collaboration & analysis of student data that results in continued mastery of goals for students. It further noted that teacher capacity is strengthened by teachers collaborating on the implementation of instructional shifts and student supports. The impact of this year's collaborations, that focused on the school's Instructional Focus of Accelerating Student Achievement through Assessment and Feedback, were also noted in Quality Review feedback: In all classes visited, examples of student self-assessment were evident. Examples included an English Language Arts checklist. Checks for understanding lead to adjustments to instruction that enable students to be aware of their progress and next steps. Student work reflects teacher assessments that include actionable and meaningful feedback so students can expand their learning. Inter-visitation and Consultancy Protocols added an element of peer accountability necessary to ensure fidelity of implementation. Implementation of the Harvard Graduate School of Education's DataWise Inquiry Process provided data based support for assessment of practices, strategies & curricula modifications. As a result, as evidenced by 2017-2018 Advance Data, all of the teachers rated Developing in this domain moved to an end of year rating of Effective. Additionally, 5% of teachers previously rated Effective were rated Highly Effective in end of year observations. Area of Focus: P17X intends to further strengthen collaborative teaching and the resulting student outcomes by increasing their levels of expertise related to Designing Coherent Instruction & differentiating instruction based on 1  individual student data, an instructional practice that, according to Quality Review feedback, needs to be more deeply implemented across classrooms. Effective Leadership: As also noted in 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback, the principal at P17X has effectively collaborated with the school community to ensure that a clear message about expectations and vision is communicated. Cabinet meetings have been expanded to include multiple stakeholders, data is reviewed and adjustments made to curriculum and instruction and intentional monitoring of data and incorporation of accountability systems ensure fidelity of practice and implementation and school wide success. "In the Loop" newsletters, in addition to staff meetings centered on communication of vision and expectations, clearly articulate a clear message. Area of focus: P17X will strengthen the effectiveness of its leadership in the 2018-2019 school year by communicating expectations for scaffolded, differentiated and specially designed, coherent instruction and establishing a Professional Development Plan related to the school's Instructional Focus and the focus of the Collaborative Teaching CEP goal. Supportive Environment: The positive learning environment at P17X was the 2017-2018 Quality Review Area of Celebration. Feedback cited the multi-site based Student Government and its impact on instructional practices such as creation of a math block for students of similar levels, individual and small group advisories, and student recognition of how their voice is valued at P17X. PBIS provides a supportive environment to students through a school-wide PBIS system that clearly details expectations and reinforces positive behaviors, ensuring classroom environments that are welcoming, safe and orderly. The Fletcher's Place program has created opportunities to develop students who support and push each other through peer mentoring. The impact is seen in PBIS data that indicates a year to year decrease from 2016 to 2017, in all infractions, of more than fifty percent. Area of Focus: Based on administrative and teacher feedback, as well as 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback, P17X will enhance its supportive environment by providing more opportunities for student voice, ownership and peer to peer interactions. Strong Family and Community Ties: P17X has developed strong family and community ties as noted in 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback, parent surveys, website activity and participation in Saturday Academies. Quality Review feedback noted that communication with families is effective and that 80% of parents attend school open houses. Parent trainings are detailed in school newsletters as well as the school website. Saturday Academy and other parent trainings included dealing with challenging behaviors, college applications & financial aid procedures and understanding assessments. 94% of parents stated, on a school learning survey, that teachers are in constant contact with them regarding their child's academic performance and 94% also stated that they felt that staff understood their problems and concerns. Area of Focus: Based on parental feedback, one of the greatest areas of concern for parents is how to support their student in transitioning to college and career. P17X will expand its family training on college and career options for all students, particularly ELLs and students with disabilities. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75X017 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 426 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 90.1% % Reduced Lunch 19.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 53.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 0.0% 0.2% 99.8% 38.5% 1.9% 2.1% 8 20% 6.1 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a comprehensive needs assessment and analysis of relevant data, including 2017-2018 Quality Review Feedback, 2017-2018 curriculum assessments, SANDI, Edperformance and Fountas & Pinnell data, our strengths relative to the Framework for Great Schools element Rigorous Instruction are evident & include purposeful implementation of research based instructional strategies such as Thinking Maps, Common Core Aligned curriculum at all grade levels and with all population demographics, collaborative teacher team analysis of student data and curricular revisions and adaptations based on that data. Data trends from these sources indicate gains of 18% in overall reading levels, however, IEP data also indicates that 82% of students struggle with decoding skills and require Test Read accommodations while curriculum data indicates that 94% of Alternate Assessment students struggle with both encoding and decoding. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers' incorporation of Specially Designed Instruction (SDI) based strategic reading into literacy instruction will result in a 5% increase in baseline to year end Edperformance scores for standardized students and SANDI scores for alternate assessment students. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Staff will be provided training in MSQI components Debate, Wilson Reading System & Wilson JustWords MSQI Coordinator July - August 2018 --MSQI staff Teachers --Administrative Staff Staff will be trained in Fundations and Guided Reading September-November 2018 --MSQI Coordinator --Wilson trainers --Instructional Coach September 2018-June 2019 --Teachers -MSQI Coach -Principal Professional learning & coaching support All teachers Professional learning on specific word work and strategies for ELL students will be provided. Collaborative teacher teams will meet: Once every six weeks to analyze data Weekly for inter-visitation to provide peer feedback for implementation Bimonthly with MSQI coach for professional learning & implementation support. All Teachers 6 week cycles beginning November 2018 and concluding June 2019 -Assistant Principals -ELL/ENL Staff -Instructional Coach -MSQI Coach -Principal -Assistant Principals Teacher Team Leaders -Classroom Teachers -ELL/ENL staff -Instructional Coach 5  Monthly with ELL/ENL staff for specific strategies for this population and to assess effectiveness on current work. Administrative oversight to ensure implementation will include: All staff 07/2018 Principal Participation in Program Trainings Assistant Principals Review of baseline, mid-term & end of year data Classroom observations Development of goal specific implementation & accountability action plan with supervisory assignments 09/2018 01/2019 06/2019 Observation cycles: 9/25-11/3 2018 11/6-12/15 2018 12/18-2/2 2019 2/5-3/23 2019 3/26 - 5/11 2019 5/14 - 6/8 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be engaged and supported in their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in the following ways: 6  2018-2019 curriculum maps and assessment calendar uploaded to school website. Timeline: September 2018 Key Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Teaching Staff, Parent Coordinator, Curriculum Committee Open House to provide information to parents on navigating the school website & explain curriculum alignment to the Common Core. Timeline: September 2018 Key Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Teaching Staff, Parent Coordinator Saturday Academy Workshops explaining the standards & supporting language development at home. Timeline: October 2018 Key Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Teaching Staff, Parent Coordinator Focus words & letter sounds for classes/grades posted on the School website and/or class websites. Timeline: Monthly beginning October 2018 and ending June 2019 Key Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Teaching Staff, Parent Coordinator Saturday Academy Workshop - Follow up strategies for Word Work Saturday Academy Workshop - Understanding NYS & NYCDOE Assessments Timeline: March 2019 Key Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Teaching Staff, Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HUMAN RESOURCES -Per Diem funding will be allocated to facilitate internal and external professional learning opportunities for staff members. 7  -Funding has been allocated to support the P17X website. -Instructional Coach to support Professional Learning and Implementation INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES -Fundations -Wilson Reading System -Wilson JustWords SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS -The Administrative Team will structure class schedules to provide a math block for instruction. -The Administrative Team will structure class schedules to provide for common planning time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, teachers' incorporation of SDI based Strategic Reading into the ELA Block will result in a 2.5% increase in student achievement in ELA as measured by curriculum assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) -SANDI/FAST Assessment-Alternate Assessment students-baseline and final -EdPerformance Assessment-Standardized Assessment students-baseline & final Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Based on a comprehensive needs assessment and informed by an analysis of data trends evident in 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback, SWIS data, PBIS level data and Advance data, P17X provides a safe and welcoming learning environment that includes a school wide PBIS system that is clear and consistent throughout all sites, a student government that provides student voice in key an Advisory program that ensures students are well known by staff members and are receiving supports that impact academic and personal behaviors and an Inquiry Team that analyzes relationships between academic deficits and behavioral issues and provides academic and behavioral interventions. Our 2017-2018 Quality Review cited Positive Learning Environment as an Area of Celebration, specifically referencing Student government & its impact on such instructional practices as creation of a math block for students of similar levels, individual and small group advisories and the recognition by students that their voice is valued. PBIS data from the 2016-2017 to 2017-2018 school year indicates a decrease in all infractions of more than fifty percent. The comprehensive needs assessment and analysis of the data sources described above also identified the need to continue to strengthen student engagement through increased positive peer to peer interactions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P17X will develop student structures to improve student ownership and positive peer to peer interactions as evidenced by a 5% increase in PBIS points earned. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administration will provide training & materials for student led Emotional Literacy support, peer mediation and conflict resolution. Crisis Team Administration will review committee minutes September 2018-February 2019 -Teachers -Assistant Principals -Principal On-going Crisis Team will identify students to act as Emotional Literacy Advocates. Students March 2019-April 2019 -Teachers Crisis Team will train student leaders in Emotional Literacy & peer mediation/conflict resolution Emotional Literacy Advocates will visit classes & lead students in Mood Meter Feeling Expression & role model positive peer to peer interactions. Teachers Students -Assistant Principals -Principal -Teachers -Principals -Assistant Principals April 2019-June 2019 Peer mediation will be utilized to resolve student to student conflicts. 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Open House - Introduce the Program Timeline: September 2018 Key Personnel: Crisis/PBIS Teams, Student Government Advisors X017 Website - Program information and updates Timeline: September 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel: Crisis/PBIS Teams & Parent Coordinator, Student Government Advisors Saturday Academy - Student led workshops to share strategies for home/sibling issues Timeline: January 2019 Key Personnel: Student Government Advisors, Crisis Team, PBIS Team Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HUMAN RESOURCES -Per Diem funding will be allocated to facilitate internal and external professional learning opportunities for staff members. -Funding has been allocated to support the P17X website. INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES: -Training guides for peer mediation/peer conflict resolution SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS 1  -Student Government Meetings -PBIS/Crisis Team Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, reported incidents of negative peer to peer interaction will decrease by 2.5% as measured by PBIS points data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Oors data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a comprehensive needs assessment and analysis of data from Advance, 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback, Collaborative Teacher Team binders and teacher schedules, P17X's areas of strength in Collaborative Teaching include schedule adjustments that provide opportunities for teacher teams to meet collaboratively on a daily basis, development of a Teacher Team handbook that provides guidance for protocol based collaboration focused on analysis of student work and opportunities for peer feedback. A comprehensive needs assessment and analysis of the above specified data sources identified differentiation and scaffolding as priority needs that, when addressed, will further strengthen this framework element. Quality Review feedback stated that differentiation was evident but not in the vast majority of classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will collaboratively analyze instruction and participate in inter-visitations with model classrooms to improve differentiation and scaffolding strategies, resulting in a 5% increase in baseline to end of year curriculum assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will receive Professional Learning related to Danielson Domain 1: Planning & Preparation & Domain 3: Instruction Teachers October 2018: -Teachers Professional Learning will be differentiated for new teachers. A percentage of Professional Learning will focus specifically on ELL population. -Assistant Principals -Principals -Instructional Coach Content Knowledge & Pedagogy - Differentiating Curricula November 2018: Setting Instructional Outcomes - Scaffolding Instruction December 2018: Assessment & IEP Based Instruction - SDI January 2019: Strategies for ELLS February 2019-June 2019-Engaging Students in Learning - Peer to Peer/Small Group Instruction 4 Teachers will collaboratively peer assess their instructional plans as they relate to UDL, Differentiation & SDI. Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 -Teachers -Assistant Principals -Principal Teachers will collaboratively brainstorm strategies & suggestions for adapting curriculum to facilitate student access, scaffolding & differentiation strategies and implementing SDI. Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 -Teachers -Assistant Principals -Principal Teachers will engage in inter-visitation in Lab Classrooms to strengthen their practice & peer assess implementation of UDL, differentiation & SDI. Teachers will collaboratively assess student work, focusing specifically on areas of growth resulting form implementation of differentiation, UDL, SDI & scaffolding strategies. Administrative staff will review Professional Learning Community Meeting binders to provide oversight & ensure implementation. Teachers January 2019 -Teachers February 2019 -Assistant Principals March 2019 -Principal Teachers April 2019 -Classroom Teachers May 2019 June 2019 -Data Specialist -UFT Teacher Center Coach -Principal -Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies to engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home include: Differentiation & Scaffolding strategies specifically cited on student homework Timeline: September 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel: Teaching Staff Saturday Academy Workshops to explain CCLS curriculum & instructional modifications that allow greater student access. Timeline: January 2019 Key Personnel: Parent Coordinator & Teaching Staff 5  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HUMAN RESOURCES -Administrative time to plan professional learning -Per session and per diem funding have been allocated to support professional learning opportunities for staff -Instructional Coach provides support for teacher teams INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES -Funding has been allocated for classroom resources to apply strategies from professional learning and teacher team meetings SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS -Meeting time for the administrative team and teachers -PLC and CTM time built into teacher schedules Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 students scores on mid-year curriculum assessments will increase 2.5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Curriculum baseline, midterm & end of year assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive assessment of our school's strengths relative to the Framework element of Effective School Leadership, based on analysis of 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback and Advance data indicate that P17X school leadership has been particularly strong in creating scheduled time for Collaborative Teaching, developing Professional Learning Plans for all staff as well as Mentoring Plans for new staff and scheduling observation cycles to ensure timely feedback to teachers. Quality Review feedback further indicates that the prior year's focus on assessment and feedback was effective and resulted in a Well Developed rating based on the following observations: In all classes visited, examples of student self-assessment were evident. Examples included an English Language Arts checklist. Checks for understanding lead to adjustments to instruction that enable students to be aware of their progress and next steps. Student work reflects teacher assessments that include actionable and meaningful feedback so students can expand their learning. A comprehensive assessment of the data sources specified above indicate that a priority need related to this element of the Framework is the provision of support related to scaffolding and differentiating instruction which was not evident in the vast majority of classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will create and implement structures that builds teachers’ capacity to design data and evidence based instruction addressing student learning needs resulting in a 3% increase in Domain 1-Planning & Preparation as measured by Advance Ratings. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will complete Professional Growth Plans Teachers The Administrative Team will use Professional Growth Plans to help teachers plan for professional learning opportunities & to develop a schooled based Professional Learning Plan that addresses the needs of experienced teachers and new teachers as well as the needs of ELL students. Teachers Teachers will apply their knowledge from professional learning opportunities to their teaching, as evidenced by formal and informal observations & peer inter-visitations. Teachers September 2018 -Teachers -Assistant Principals -Principal September 2018-October 2018 -Unit Coordinators -Teachers -Assistant Principals -Principal -Instructional Coach -Teachers -Assistant Principals -Principal -Instructional Coach October 2018 - overview & UDL November 2018- Differentiation December 2018-Specially Designed Instruction January 2019 Strategies for ELLS February 2019-June 2019-Going Deeper 8 The Administrative Team will conduct interim and final conferences with teachers to discuss how the professional learning opportunities effect their teaching practice. Teachers 09/2018 -Teachers 01/2019, 06/2019 -Assistant Principals -Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P17X will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home in the following ways: Principal's Breakfast - share school's instructional focus & benefits to students Timeline: September 2018 Key Personnel: Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, SLT Members School Leadership Team Meetings Timeline: October 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel: Administrative Staff & SLT Members X017 Website - information for families on the instructional focus & curriculum adaptations Timeline: September 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel: Administrative Staff & Parent Coordinator Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HUMAN RESOURCES -The Administrative Team will assist teachers in developing professional growth plans and schedule professional learning opportunities 9  School based Instructional Coach will support Professional Learning INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES -Instructional materials to implement strategies -Professional text to support research based practices SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS -The Administrative Team will schedule time for teachers to meet in PLC and CTM Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, addressing the priority need of building teacher capacity to design data and evidence based instruction that addresses student learning needs will result in a 1.5% increase in Advance ratings for Domain 1. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -Advance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive assessment of our school's academic program in response to strong family & community ties, via 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback, parent feedback, P17X website activity & NYC School Quality Snapshot demonstrate the strong parental family relationships as indicated by 92% of parents stating that school staff regularly communicate about how they can help their children learn, 94% feel that the staff understands their problems and concerns and 91% feel that the school staff works hard to create trusting relationships with them. Family & community relationships have been strengthened through development of Internet based school initiatives such as an interactive web site and Class Dojo, parent newsletters & Saturday Academies that provide workshops specifically for parents of students with special needs, partnerships with City Council representatives and partnerships with community agencies such as GRASP, OPWDD, Bronx Parent Resource Center, Bronx Masons, New York Life. A comprehensive assessment of the above specified data sources, particularly parental feedback, also indicates a priority need for training to parents & caregivers in supporting student preparation for college and careers and the options that are available to special needs & ELL students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will improve upon its collaborative partnership with families and community organizations to support families in effective strategies and techniques to support preparation for college and career. This will result in a 5% increase, as evidenced in ATS, in students transitioning to a less restrictive environment (LRE). 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? P17X Parent Coordinator training on goal setting & college awareness events for families July 2018 Parents will be familiarized with College Access for All and the resources, programs & participation opportunities provided by P17X at Open House events at all sites & information provided on the P17X website. Parents & Families -Parents -Families Caregivers -The Administrative Team -Parent Coordinator -College Access for All Team September 2018 -The Administrative Team -Parent Coordinator -College Access for All Team A series of workshops and events, including Saturday Academies & parent participation in college field trips, will support family involvement in student preparation for college & career. -Parents -Families October 2018 -The Administrative Team November -Parents Caregivers 2018 -Parent Coordinator January 2019 -College Access for All Team February 2019 April 2019 May 2019 Parents will be provided a resource space and technology in order to access tools & resources such as Family UCurriculum, Middle School Family Planning Guide & College Going Culture to facilitate their support of students' college & career preparation. -Parents -Families September 2018 -The Administrative Team 2  Caregivers -Parents -Parent Coordinator -College Access for All Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. GRASP, OPWDD, Bronx Parent Resource Center, Bronx Masons, New York Life. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HUMAN RESOURCES -Staff to assist with Saturday Academy and other family events -Translators -Funding has been allocated to update P17X website INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES -OTPS funding has been allocated to support the purchasing of materials to implement family events and Saturday Academy. -Funding has been allocated to support parent and student celebrations. SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS -Schedule monthly Saturday Academy -Per Diem funding has been allocated to facilitate the scheduling of parent meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 3  By February 2019, school leaders will identify 2.5% more students to move to a less restrictive environment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environment Survey Less Restrictive Environment Monitoring Chart Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school Individual instruction After school Small group During school Individual Instruction After school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) Level I SANDI students and all standardized students performing between below Level 2.5 on ELAState Assessment. Mathematics Level I SANDI students and all standardized students performing below Level 2.5 on ELAState Assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Leveled Literacy Interventions SMILE Fundations Ed Performance Read 180 System 44 Wilson Reading System Wilson Just Words EdPerformance ST Math Lure of the Labyrinth Science Social Studies Level I SANDI students and all standardized students performing below grade level on curriculum & EdperformanceAssessments. Level I SANDI students and all standardized students performing below grade level on curriculum assessments Brainpop.com Small group During school Research-Based Projects Individual instruction After school UNIQUE Brainpop.com Small group During school Research-Based Projects Individual instruction After school UNIQUE 5  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) All students with FBAs, BIPs, and Level III, IV and V infractions. In all aspects of the school day where target behaviors are displayed. During the school day Passport Social Studies Functional Behavior Assessment (FBA)/ Behavior Intervention Plan (BIP)- Created in collaboration with teachers, paraprofessionals, and other staff to target undesirable behaviors and prevent them from occurring and to provide positive behavior supports for the students. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 40 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 0  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. X017, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. X017 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 3  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. X017, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 4  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 5  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 6  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 7  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 2 2 0 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P17X Title III will offer an after school program for our ELL students that will promote literacy and physical activity. The Title III program will serve 12 students in grades K-5. They will be instructed in two 6:1:1 classes, K-2 and a 3-5 class, in alignment with their IEP class ratios. The students who will attend this after school program performed at the entering and emerging levels on the 2018 NYSESLAT. There will be two ENL/bilingual certified teachers who will provide instruction in English. There will be four paraprofessionals, of which at least two will be fluent in Spanish. They will provide home language and cultural support as well as assistance to both teachers. Two students will need 1:1 crisis paraprofessionals. There will be an administrator available on both days to supervise the program to ensure that all compliance documents and instruction are conducted appropriately. The administrator's regular hours are from 7:45am to 3:30pm and will join the Title III program from 3:30 p.m. to 5:30p.m. A secretary will be available to assist with payroll and material purchases for a total of 10 hours. The schedule of the program will be Tuesdays and Thursdays from 3:00 to 5:30 pm for the duration of six weeks. The program will begin in April 2019 and end in June 2019. Instruction will be provided in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. The theme of our Title III program is “Healthy Mind, Healthy Body”. The literacy component of the after school program will take place in the classroom during the first half of the session. It will target the student’s listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in English. The second half of the session will include the physical activity component of the program and will take place in the gym or playground. It will target a more hands-on approach of what they learned in the classroom. Through literacy, students will learn about how to maintain a healthy lifestyle through good nutrition and physical activity. Students are expected to create a culminating project about what they learned to maintain a healthy lifestyle. In order to do that, students will use technology to practice vocabulary and to interpret information found in food charts, research about the topic and discuss ways they can incorporate physical activity daily. Competent use of computers prevents ELL learners from "academic and social marginalization" (Murray & Kouritzin, 2010, p.187). Students will be able to improve their sight word vocabulary, fluency, and comprehension through the use of technology. Computer based reading instruction also allows for "increased interaction with texts, attention to individual needs, and increased independence through an ability to read texts they would not otherwise be able to read" (Case & Truscott, 2007). Research has also shown that technology offers the students easier ways to build vocabulary, achieve reading fluency, improve comprehension, access curriculum content, and strengthen home-school connections (J. Heinze, 2004). Research has highlighted many benefits of using instructional technology with ELL students. The second half of the session will take place at the gym or on the playground. 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Students will learn and practice different ways to remain physically active such as walking, climbing, running and playing team games. According to Gong (2003), active learning involves providing opportunities for students to meaningfully talk and listen, write, read, and reflect on the content, ideas, issues, and concerns of an academic subject. Additionally, physically active games have the benefit of letting students "practice and internalize vocabulary, grammar and structures extensively." Students are often motivated to play outdoor games than doing indoor activities. Furthermore, during the physical activity, students are focused on the activity and end up absorbing the language subconsciously. One can also add that fun educational and physical activities usually contain repetition, which allows the students to learn the language (Vernon, 2007). ELL students will also be provided with additional support through the use of audio-visual aids and cooperative learning that enhances interaction and oral communication. In addition, students will benefit from social interactions and activities which can facilitate communication in English with other students. All of these opportunities will allow students to rely on home language skills, while they acquire stronger literacy skills in English. Teachers will use teacher-made assessments, such as an alternate assessment rubric based on students' IEP goals and Common Core Learning Standards: Reading standards 1, 6, 11 (read closely to determine what the text says explicitly and to make logical inferences from it; cite specific textual evidence when writing or speaking to support conclusions drawn from the text; assess how point of view or purpose shapes the content and style of a text; respond to literature by employing knowledge of literary language, textual features, and forms to read and comprehend, reflect upon, and interpret literary texts from a variety of genres and a wide spectrum of American and world cultures), Writing standard 6 (use technology, including the Internet, to produce and publish writing and to interact and collaborate with others), and Speaking and Listening standard 5 (make strategic use of digital media and visual displays of data to express information and enhance understanding of presentations). Teachers will use various ENL methodologies and strategies, such as Total Physical Response, Cooperative Learning and Scaffolding. In order for students to learn and practice academic and healthy living skills they will create a project promoting healthy living. We will purchase five iPads, several books about health/ nutrition/ exercise, classroom supplies for writing assignments (notebooks, pencils, and markers) and healthy snack and refreshments for parent engagement activities. Students will also need supplies from the gym/playground such as balls, ropes, chalk (for floor games and literacy activities) basketball hoops, hula hoops, scooters, etc. (we will utilize the equipment we have in the gym). With these supplies, students will learn and practice ways to stay active. They will also be able to create a culminating project, a poster and/or booklet, about what they learned in order to maintain a healthy lifestyle. Students will present what they learned about nutrition and how they plan on maintaining a healthy lifestyle. Students will choose to make their presentation digitally or paper-based. Students will use symbols, pictures, and texts to create their project. Every student will present their culminating project the last day of the program for their peers and parents. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 1  Part C: Professional Development Research has shown that collaborative teams are an essential component of effective instructional programs for students with severe disabilities and for working with ELLs with disabilities (Rainforth, York & MacDonald, 1992; Baca & Cervantes, 2004). In alignment with the focus of the Title III instructional program, all staff involved in the program will participate in five hours of professional development. The three professional development sessions will be held the week before the after school program behins. The first two professional development sessions will be after school on Tuesday and Wednesday from 3:00- 5:00pm. The final professional session on Thursday will be from 3:00- 4:00pm. The administrator will collect all pertinent materials, as well as time sheets/time cards. During these sessions the administrator, teachers and paraprofessionals who applied for and accepted a position to work in the Title III instructional after school program will participate in on-going dialogue through text-based discussions targeted to make the curriculum comprehensible and meaningful for our linguistically and culturally diverse student population. The two licensed ENL/bilingual teachers participating in the Title III instructional program will take turns facilitating the PDs utilizing instructional materials and resources available on EngageNY.org including the Grade 2 ELA Domain 10: The Human Body: Building Blocks and Nutrition ELA & Literacy Curriculum and New Language Arts Progressions samples. Additional online health education tools will include learntobehealthy.org, nourishinteractive.com and kidshealth.org. The two licensed ENL/bilingual teachers facilitating the PD workshops will supplement the readings and discussions with information pertinent to our specific ELL population in order to maximize that applicability and immediate relevance to our educators and students. The first session will focus on scaffolding instruction to support deeper understanding of content in a new language. The second session will focus on developing formative assessments to measure progress. The third session will focus on gathering data to showcase best-practices. All professional development during the training sessions will be provided by either the teaching staff or the administrator who will be working during the Title III instructional program. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Research proves that afterschool programs are most successful when they are structured to offer (1) homework support, including specific study skills and motivational strategies structured to complement the school curriculum; (2) staff members who share the same linguistic and cultural backgrounds as the students; and (3) constructive ways to include parents and other family members in the program (Huang & Cho, 2009; Wong, 2010; David, 2011; Rodriguez-Valls, 2011). To promote higher achievement for ELLs, parents are invited to participate on Tuesdays and Thursdays by working alongside their children. We will distribute a Nutrition and Physical Fitness Guide for parents in their home languages from a web resource and discuss with the parents to promote awareness and engagement in the topic. Parents will be encouraged to participate in shared reading activities as well as to engage in physical activities. Parents may coach teams, model/practice exercises, count laps, and most importantly offer words of encouragement to our students. We want parents of our ELLs to be involved in all planned 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities activities in order to ensure carryover at home based on what they learned about healthy living at school. These parental engagement activities will be provided by the teachers and paraprofessionals. All Title III parents will receive written information in their preferred language(s) regarding the Title III supplemental after school program prior to commencement. P17X is committed to developing our Title III parent participation through the activities that will help build and increase positive communication. Parents will be sent information in a timely fashion in order to make proper accommodations. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $9,703.10 – Instructional program $1,523.18 – PD – (3) on Tuesday, Wednesday & Thursday Total $11,226.28 Purchased services  High quality staff 0 Total $1,034.40 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Instruction: 1 Supervisor x 6 weeks x 4 hours a week x $63.45= $1522.80 2 Teachers x 6 weeks x 5 hours a week x $60.65 = $3639.00 4 Paras x 6 weeks x 5 hours a week x $34.73 = $4,167.60 1 secretary x 10 hours x $37.37 = $373.70 PDs: 1 Supervisor x 3.5 hours x $63.45 = $222.08 2 Teachers x 5 hours x $60.65 = $606.50 4 Paras x 5 hours x $34.73 = $694.60 0 3x iPad Wi-Fi 32GB - Space Gray @$290/ea= $870.00 Item Number: 35857482X Contract Number: 9673581 Vendor Catalog Number: MP2F2LL/A Vendor Number: APP009000 3x MAX SHIELD XTREME-S CASE FOR IPAD 5 @$21.86/ea=$65.58 3 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Item Number: 358490308Contract Number: B220901 Vendor Catalog Number: 4630349 Vendor Number: CDW043000 1xPurposeful Pairs: Connecting Fiction and Nonfiction: Level 1: Eating Right and It's Good Enough to Eat! 12-Pack @$50.66/ea Item Number: 902442627 Contract Number: 7000891 Vendor Catalog Number: Vendor Number: TEA004000 6x "Me and My Amazing Body" by Sweeney, Joan @$4.63/ea=$27.78 Item Number: 644753641 Contract Number: B2171AAVendor Catalog Number: Vendor Number: ADV018000 6x "My Healthy body" by Kalman, Bobbie @3.48/ea=$20.88 Item Number: 644639814 Contract Number: B2171BA Vendor Catalog Number: Vendor Number: BOO028000 0 0 Parent Engagement/Refreshments $105.32 $12,366 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 $105.32 $12,366 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name P17x Borough Bronx School Number 17 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Marlin Hoggard Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Carlos Bonilla/ENL Eileen Mota Teacher/Subject Area Alison Hlasny/ Spec. Ed Teacher/Subject Area Raysa Rodriguez/Bil Science Related-Service Provider Diana Ruiz/ Speech Superintendent Ketler Louissaint Assistant Principal Eboni Sowell Coach School Counselor Geraldine Espinal Parent Andrea Goldman Parent Coordinator Maria Arias Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 6 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 5 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics 5  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 433 Total number of ELLs 83 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.17% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 5 4 6 1 7 2 8 1 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 4 1 2 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 24 0 0 0 0 0 24 1 3 3 2 2 1 4 8 K 2 Lang. SP Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 3 8 2 1 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P17x uses a variety of assessments to identify early literacy skills in order to guide instructional planning for the ELLs. These assessments include SANDI, Fountas and Pinnell, EL SOL and teacher-created assessments. The data collected helps us identify specific trends and common areas where students need to improve. Based on this data, we create IEP goals and objectives that drive the appropriate instruction for each student, which is align to CCLS. Technology has been infused in all content areas to promote the development of the four language modalities through multi-sensory engagement. Teachers rely on students’ home language(s) to enhance, develop and maintain English proficiency. AIS services are provided and support students throughout the day. Inquiry teams review assessments periodically to identify areas in need of improvement and develop appropriate scaffolds within instructional material to help ELLs progress in all identified areas. 6  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Many teachers in our staff are trained in district lead workshops for First Author and Attainment at the beginning of the school year. These teachers then turn-key the information to the rest of the staff. The teachers are provided the assessment materials for their corresponding grade and assess their students at the beginning, middle and end of the year. The assessments are due to be completed and entered into each student’s individual portfolio to be reviewed by their peer and/or administrator. Assessments are also an important part of how each student’s IEP is developed. The student goals are based on the performance task of their assessment. Teachers meet every day during what is called “Professional Learning Community” to support each other through their formative assessment periods. They establish timelines and share materials they had success using for the assessment. Teachers are encouraged to share student work based on their curriculum-embedded assessment on their bulletin board. They rotate what assessment based work they will display for the month (i.e., April is based on Attainment goals but May is based on First Author). 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ELL programs through student performance on the NYSAA, NYSESLAT, and mastery of IEP goals and short-term objectives. We also use SANDI assessments bi-annually to evaluate student mastery of the ELA, mathematics, science and social studies. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? All summative data that is gathered at the end of the academic year is organized in the student’s portfolio that moves with the student from classroom to classroom. The data helps the teacher get an understanding of the student’s academic needs and continue with the performance tasks the student is currently working on. Additionally, all student IEP’s are data driven from the results of summative assessments. The IEP present level of performance is based on the students’ summative assessments. The IEP annual measurable goals are obtained from performance tasks that the student must improve in order to show progress. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The RtI model is based on three tiers of instruction and intervention support. Tier 1 is the instructional core that is intended to incorporate high quality evidence-based instruction for all students. This includes instruction that has been shown to be effective for ELLs, and differentiation to meet students’ diverse needs. ELLs’ who score below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 for more targeted and intensive academic support. The support services provided are aligned to intervention plans P17x is already providing to all students, including but not limited to, AIS, Saturday Academy, after-school program.  Tier 2 and Tier 3 instruction are tailored to meet ELLs’ language needs taking into consideration evidence such as the following: • Number of years of instruction in a bilingual education or English as a new language program   • English and home language literacy   • Content area and social-emotional support needs of students with  inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE)   • English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs   • Results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam   • Bilingual education or English as a New Language teacher recommendation   • Content area teacher recommendation   • Parent or guardian request   • Sample of student work in English and, if possible, in the home language   • Bilingual educational evaluation   6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT scores are reviewed by students’ bilingual and ENL teachers. These teachers are able to analyze incremental progress to differentiate lessons accordingly. They are also able to see areas in need of improvement and offer extra support 7  to the students. Our ELLs continue to demonstrate improvement in English via mastery of their IEP goals and via their performance on the NYSAA ELA. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Members of the ELL team and the School Testing Coordinator has access to the ELL compliance binder through Google Drive. The ELL team discusses any adjustments that must be made to our programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As a D75 school, our classes are self-contained(ungraded). Classes travel together as a group during the entire instructional day, except when students are pulled out for mandated related services, as per IEP. Our Freestanding ENL program provides instruction in English via a combination of stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL, with home language support, emphasizing English language acquisition. Stand-alone ENL is delivered to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses, which is taught by certified ENL teachers. Integrated ENL is instruction to build English language skills through content area instruction and is delivered via a co-teaching approach, by a certified ENL teacher and a core content area teacher. Both models of ENL instruction include content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies.   b. TBE program. If applicable. ELLs in our TBE program are mandate for bilingual instruction, as per their IEP. In the TBE program, students transfer home language skills to English by spending instructional time primarily in the home language (Spanish) before steadily transitioning to English, which is taught by certified bilingual teachers. At the beginning/entering level, TBE students receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English; as a student’s English proficiency increases, more of his or her instructional day is spent learning in English. As per CR Part 154.2, our TBE program is comprised of three components: (1) a language arts instruction component, including home language arts and English language arts; (2) an English as a new language component; and (3) a bilingual content area instructional component (e.g. math, science, and social studies). c. DL program. If applicable. Currently, P17X features ENL and Bilingual programs. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ENL teachers and bilingual teachers work in collaboration with Assistant Principal Eboni Sowell to create their schedules to accommodate the mandates of our ELLs, as per CR 154.2. The number of stand-alone ENL, integrated ENL, ELA and HLA instructional minutes are dependent on students’ levels of proficiency and IEP mandates. Due to staffing constraints, the ENL students receive the maximum of instructional minutes possible. In grades K to 8, at the entering, emerging and transitioning levels, integrated ENL with ELA is provided; at the expanding level, the integrated ENL is with any core content area that best meets the needs of the student. All former ELLs, up to 2 years after exiting ELL status, receive a minimum number .5 unit of integrated ENL. 8  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Science, social studies, language arts and math in our TBE classes are taught by certified bilingual teachers in both Spanish and English. Our ENL-only students are taught content instruction in English, with home language support, from their ENL teachers and from content area teachers. ENL is provided by certified ENL teachers through a combination of stand-alone and integrated ENL, depending on individual proficiency level. All ELL students receive instruction that addresses the CCLS, second language acquisition needs, and disability-related needs via their IEP goals, ENL strategies and differentiated instruction. Instructional approaches and methods we use include, but are not limited to, Total Physical Response (TPR), balanced literacy, cooperative learning, role-playing, performance-based assessments, scaffolding, multi-sensory integration and graphic organizers. The use of technology and augmentative communication devices are incorporated into ENL and content are instruction to give students additional support. Multi-sensory and multicultural materials are infused throughout the curriculum. In both Standardized and Alternate Assessment programs, teachers adapt the instruction to meet the students’ individual needs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs in bilingual classes are administered informal assessments (e.g. teacher-created tests, unit tests) in their home languages throughout the year to determine growth and identify areas that need to be targeted for instruction. Our ENL-only students are evaluated via checklists in their home language, as needed, to informally monitor their progress throughout the year. Alternate placement paraprofessionals who speak the student's language and English provide additional language support during informal assessments and observations, as per IEP mandates. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Staff will provide stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL, as mandated by CR 154.2, in order to service all ELL students and differentiate instruction that will target all students academic and social needs. Currently we have no students with interrupted or inconsistent formal education-SIFE. Nonetheless, identified SIFE students would receive one-on-one instruction from teachers, academic and emotional support from buddy students and paraprofessionals, and development of initial literacy in their home language provided by bilingual certified teachers. Instruction targeting long-term ELLs focuses on differentiated explicit instruction, using a combination of balance literacy and multi-sensory approaches, in order to help LTE strengthen academic English. All developing ELL students will be supported through AIS, instructional technology and visual arts. Newcomers will be supported through home language instruction provided by bilingual certified teachers, one-on-one and small group instruction incorporating technology as a tool to develop basic oral and listening skills in English. Former ELLs may continue to be eligible for ELL testing accommodations and 90 minutes per week of ENL (former ELLs up to 2 years after testing out are eligible for ELL testing accommodations and 90 minutes of ENL). All ELL students are provided with extra support through the CHAMPS after school program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The use of technology and augmentative communication devices are incorporated to give students additional differentiated and instructional support. Multi-sensory and multicultural ENL materials are infused throughout all aspects of instruction. Some materials are teacher made to address the students different cultural backgrounds. The classroom library includes a variety of books, at the students' functional levels, that reflect the background, needs and strengths of ENLs. There are differentiated curriculum's such as SMILE, Fundations, Ready Gen, EQUALS and Go Math curriculum that address the various academic levels and grades. The use of technology is incorporated into ENL and content areas. ENL and classroom teachers provide students with additional support with multi-sensory activities, multicultural themes and materials which are infused through out all aspects of instruction. Required services and supports also correspond to ELLs age levels through the use of 9  real, photographs, music, and the integration of motivating, culturally relevant activities into language and content instruction of our students. Students in the TBE program read, write, listen, and speak in Spanish using Spanish-language books, materials, symbols, and computer-based software. ENLs receive additional support in the home language from a classroom paraprofessional, as well as, speech providers who speak the students’ home language and English. Home language supports are also used in the ENL program, when necessary, via music, technology and materials from students' homes in their home languages. Required services supports are modified in order to differentiate for the needs of each student. Materials are modified and teacher made in order to be age appropriate 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? It is our goal to provide students with the necessary academic skills and move them to a less restrictive environment. Our ELL students are moved from 6:1:1 to 8:1:1 and from 8:1:1 to 12:1:1. All of our students' instruction is individualized and CCLS aligned. Flexibility is built into instruction through the use of multi-sensory, universally designed, visually-based, culturally and age appropriate materials, settings, and social interactions that help our ELLs achieve their IEP goals and improve their English language skills within the least restrictive environment. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted interventions are provided in natural environments, during functional, and motivating activities that afford our students opportunities to practice and generalize their skills across settings and with a variety of people. ELLs participate in community improvement activities such as recycling, Penny Harvest, Food Drive, and other activities that are aligned to interdisciplinary learning standards. In addition, students in our bilingual classes develop their communication skills using the home language to improve listening, speaking, reading and writing abilities in Spanish. ELLs also participate in CHAMPS, Title III supplemental instructional program, performing arts presentations, talent show, cultural celebrations, and the annual interdisciplinary fair. These activities provide natural environments and targeted interventions that address our ELL students' linguistic, social-emotional and academic needs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? ENL teachers will provide stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Our school does not plan to close the Bilingual Program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are represented in all school programs (e.g. Title III, CHAMPS, school clubs, contests and field trips) that will enhance their social, academic and cultural needs. Parents are provided with information regarding all school programs in their home language and encouraged to have their child get involved and participate in all school related activities. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The use of educational software and multimedia are regularly used to enhance and support English language acquisition in all content areas. All of our ELLs have access to instruction with Smartboards, iPads, computers, digital cameras, audio-visual materials, and augmentative and alternative communication devices. Classroom libraries contains books in English and home language of students, including those adapted by teachers to meet the needs of students with severe disabilities. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? HLA is delivered by certified bilingual teachers to students in our TBE classes. Students who have B mandates in their IEPs but who are not in bilingual classes receive home language support from alternate placement paraprofessionals who work under 0  the direction of the students' teachers. Student use bilingual books, bilingual eBooks, iPads, and other home language materials. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our speech teachers, counselors, physical therapists and occupational therapists work in collaboration with ELL teachers to support ELL students. ELL teachers and related service providers develop age and grade appropriate activities and tasks that address the IEP goals and functional levels of each student. All activities target students' individual linguistic, academic and social needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The use of educational software and multimedia are regularly used to enhance and support English language acquisition in all content areas. All of our ELLs have access to instruction with Smartboards, iPads, computers, digital cameras, audio-visual materials, and augmentative and alternative communication devices. Classroom libraries contains books in English and home language of students, including those adapted by teachers to meet the needs of students with severe disabilities. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P17x is a 12-month school. We have activities and programs that support the ELL population throughout the school year. All new students are strongly encouraged to participate in Chapter 683. The parent coordinator, invites parents to tour the school and provides parent with a detailed description of the programs and support services available, including information on the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Our bilingual AP, Eboni Sowell, is also available to assist parents as necessary. Community building activities such as trips, barbecues and cultural celebrations are ongoing and all ELL students are encouraged to participate. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, P17X does not offer language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, P17X does not feature a Dual Language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development topics for teachers of ELLs include the following: Strategies and Materials for Home Language instruction, SANDI assessment, and NYSAA. Additional topics addressed by the Title III Professional Development plan are Standardized Assessment and Alternate Assessment Methods for ELLs, the use of Technology in Bilingual and ENL Education, and the adaptation of Bilingual and ENL materials for education of ELLs with severe disabilities. ALL P17x’s staff (APs, bilingual, ENL and common branch teachers, special education teachers, clusters, counselors, related service providers, paraprofessionals and parent coordinators) are invited and encouraged to attend all district and city workshops and trainings. In addition, the school will ensure the attendance of bilingual, ENL, and monolingual teachers and paraprofessionals at district, 1  city and state-wide conferences focusing on the education of ELLs, and transitioning of our elementary school students to middle school and middle schools students to high school. Staff is provided with information on Jose P. training at the district and city. Staff that attend the training provide Ms. Sowell, the AP, with a copy of agenda and hours completed and certificates care kept in teachers file. ELL compliance binder has updated information on staff that has been trained and/or are still in need of completing the hours. All are encouraged to attend and complete the necessary hours to meet requirements. All staff attending ELL training have to provide documentation to AP, Ms. Sowell, which will be filed in the ELL compliance binder, as well as, the teacher's file. All staff members (APs, bilingual, ENL and common branch teachers, clusters, counselors, related service providers and parent coordinators) are invited and encouraged to attend district and city-wide ELL/CCLS learning opportunities. Topics include ENL methodologies, scaffolding strategies, promotional criteria and testing accommodations for ELL students. Best-practices are then shared amongst colleagues via common planning periods. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. School administrators provide teachers whose students are transitioning from one school level to another with assistance from guidance counselors and school coach in preparing the teachers and students for transitioning. Their collaboration ensures smooth transitions for our students. Guidance counselors work closely with all ELL students, both at the elementary and middle school level, to help students come up with future plans and goals as they transition to a new school. Counselors work and collaborate in following up with teachers and providing instruction aligned to the common core that will help support the academic needs of all ELL students. Professional Development is provided to all teachers in order to address the language acquisition needs of our English Language Learners. As per CR Part 154.2, a minimum of 15 percent of the required professional development hours for all teachers will focus on best practices for how to integrate language and content instruction as well as co-teaching strategies for our English Language Learners. For bilingual and ENL teachers, 50 percent of the required professional development will focus on integrating language and content instruction and aligning language acquisition with core content area instruction. Teachers should retain their agendas for their records. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Individual meetings with parents or guardians of ELLs are provided annually in order to discuss their child's language development progress in all content areas as well as the goals of the program. School records attendance and provides interpretation/translation services, as needed. This meeting is in addition to parent-teacher conferences and parent orientation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The Parent Coordinator at P17x will continue to offer parents of ELLs ongoing information in their home language and organize workshops on different aspects of their child’s education, such as utilizing ADL activities to support language development at home. Interpreters and childcare are available to encourage participation. Parents of ELLs also are encouraged to become members of the School Leadership Team and the Parent Association. This allows for all parents to have a say in school policy and become involved in their school community. 2  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Marlin Hoggard, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P17x School DBN: 75X017 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Marlin Hoggard Title Principal Eboni Sowell Assistant Principal Joanna Torres Parent Coordinator Eileen Mota/ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Andrea Goldman Parent Alison Hlasny/ Spec. Ed Teacher/Subject Area Raysa Rodriguez/Bil Sci Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Geraldine Espinal School Counselor Diana Ruiz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Bil ST Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75X017 School Name: P17x Superintendent: KetlerLouissaint The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Arias (*Primary) Maria Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Surveys are sent home and phone calls are made to parents in order to identify language needs of our parents. The data and methodologies used to assess our school's written translation and oral presentation needs also consists of the following: * Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS) * Parent interviews, specifiying what language is preferred for all written and oral correspondence * Student Registration Form * Place of Birth report (RPOB) 6  * Parent Orientations * Emergency cards- parents’ language preference is written on the card * PTA meetings 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic French English Portuguese Spanish Soninke Twi 2 1 361 1 93 2 0 0.43% 0.22% 78.48% 0.22% 20.22% 0.43% 0% 2 1 360 1 95 1 1 0.43% 0.22% 78.26% 0.22% 20.65% 0.22% 0.22% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you The written translation services our school will provide are primarily for correspondence to parents and include the following: Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All translated documents will be distributed at the same time as the School staff will provide written translation 7  * Translated Bill of Rights and Responsibilities * Student Registration Form * Translated Home Language Identification Surveys English documents, as needed, throughout the school year. * ELL Parent Orientation * Workshop information * Title III After school Applications * Monthly newsletters and calendars * Special forms (lunch forms, blue emergency cards, health) * IEP/Evaluation notices services in-house for parents in their preferred languages in order to support shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement. If necessary, an outside vendor will also be utilized. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school The formal face-to-face meetings that our school typically has with parents throughout the school year are registration that is ongoing, parent-teacher conferences, parent meetings with teachers throughout the year to discuss language development progress, various workshops given by staff, and IEP meetings. Informal parent interactions that may be anticipated are calls to parents about sick/injured children, calls to parents by the guidance counselor for behavior issues, and attendance calls for daily absentees. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? School staff will provide written translation services in-house for parents in their preferred languages in order to support Student registration, workshops, IEP’s and informal parent meetings are ongoing. Parent-teacher conferences is in 8  November & March. shared parent-school accountability, parent access to information about their children’s educational options, and parents’ capacity to improve their children’s achievement. If necessary, an outside vendor will also be utilized. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, school staff will provide verbal and/or written translation services in-house for parents in their preferred languages. If necessary, an outside vendor will also be utilized. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Through the CEP plan, P17X staff members are aware of the Chancellor’s translation procedures for ensuring that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. The main office must post near the primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. Staff must determine within 30 days of a student’s enrollment the primary language spoken by the parent of each student enrolled in the school. This information must be maintained in ATS and on the student emergency card. The school will provide translation and interpretation services to all parents who require language assistance unless the parents choose to rely on an adult friend/companion or relative for language and interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 9  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to meet Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, parents will be provided with written notification regarding translation and interpretation services available in the language indicated on the HLIS form and IEP meeting notifications. Parents will also be directed to the DOE website for complete information regarding this regulation and their translation rights. Parents will be informed during the September Welcome Breakfast, that school staff will provide verbal translation services in-house in their preferred language as they may need including but not limited to: for parent-teacher conferences, Saturday workshops and informal school meetings. They are encouraged to write their preferred oral and written language on the student emergency blue card (which is available in different languages) so that the staff member trying to reach them can communicate effectively. Lastly, the main office will post near the primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages indicating the availability of interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? After each parent workshop, a feedback form is provided for the parents to give us their suggestion. In addition, parent surveys will be given out every year regarding their thoughts and feelings toward the school. Our school has used this feedback from parents to shape how our Saturday Workshops take place. Their input helps decide what topic, activities and strategies they would like discussed in their preferred language so they can improve our students' lives at home. 0 
