 07X025 School Name: P.S. 025 BILINGUAL SCHOOL Principal: CARMEN TOLEDO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 25 The Bilingual School 320700010025 Pre-Kindergarten -Grade 5 School Number (DBN): 07X025 811 East 149th Street Bronx, New York 10455 718-292-2995 718-292-2997 Phone Number: YliuchaJaquez Fax: Email Address: Yjaquez@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Carmen Toledo-Guerrero Maria Lopez Emily Gonzalez Julia Harrison Yolanda Solano N/A N/A Aida Martinez (Aspiraof NY) CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 500 Courtlandt Avenue, Bronx, New York 10451 RAlvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 742-6500 Phone Number: 718 742-6548 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Ave., Bx., NY 10462/1 Fordham Plaza, Bx., NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov (718) 828-7776/(718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Mrs. C. Toledo-Guerrero Ms. Maria Lopez Ms. Emily Gonzalez Ms. Yolanda Solano Melanie Wagner Julia Harrison Joyce Johnson Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Sandra Rocha Yaqueline Cervantes Maely Jimenez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 25, The Bilingual School commits to making a difference in the community by inspiring and challenging our students to become digital citizens, critical thinkers and independent high achievers. P.S. 25, The Bilingual School commits to providing our students with a holistic student centered environment that is based on innovative, global learning facilitated by teachers and supported by the home and community.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 25, The Bilingual School is a New York City Department of Education elementary school located in the South Bronx. The school was founded in 1968 by a Vanguardist group of bilingual educators who, supported by the recently enacted Bilingual Education Act, saw the opportunity to educate English language learners from Spanish speaking countries in an innovative way. As part of Community School District 7 the school serves a diverse population of # students, most of whom are learning English as a second language. The Bilingual School is located on 811 East 149th Street. The students are mostly immigrants or from immigrant families. The community has been frequently identified as the poorest Congressional District in the United States. Many students in the school live in temporary housing. Now in its 50th year, and celebrating a milestone anniversary, P.S. 25, The Bilingual School continues to transform education by incorporating and maintaining mobile digital learning. Using the latest technologies, the students of The Bilingual School have access to increased and sophisticated resources which enable them to produce high quality digital products. P.S. 25, The Bilingual School remains committed to the transformation of the learning environments towards digital contents. There is a school website (www.thebilingualschool.org) and many classrooms have also custom websites of their own, all hosted as sub-domains under the same domain, the bilingual school.org. Many resources are posted online and students and families can access all the services anywhere, anytime with their personalized accounts. The school now deploys devices and maximizes all efforts so students and staff can take over and shape the future of the school. Alongside the innovative-global learning vision, P.S. 25, The Bilingual School is founded on the vision of creating an environment that promotes a balanced approach to literacy, incorporating the workshop model. The workshop model is also incorporated during math instruction using Go Math. This environment is directly connected to the 'Rigorous Instruction' goal in the Framework for Great Schools. The curriculum is built on project based learning and integrated curriculum units. These school-wide practices reflect the framework and, 'The Principles of Learning and Teaching'. The school values an environment that promotes independence, interdependence and self-motivation. This is evident in the design of the independent tasks that students are expected to engage in during their daily learning. P.S. 25, The Bilingual School has designed a curriculum that encompasses thematic studies, cooperative learning and authentic assessments. Social studies, Science and Technology are integrated to make learning come alive and support students as independent learners. Language Arts and Mathematics instruction combine hands-on-inquiry and cooperative learning approaches with guided instruction taught in small groups. Our reading, writing and math curriculum are responsive to the interest and needs of all learners. The school offers an inclusive and supportive learning environment. This is demonstrated by our staff's commitment to collaborative planning and unit design. Our staff is committed in collaborative planning and unit design. The balanced literacy and workshop model allows the teacher to make thoughtful decisions around assessment and effective approaches to use in order to support the learner's diverse academic and language needs. It requires teachers to reflect, revise and refine the learning objectives. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P.S. 25, the Bilingual School, is located in the south Bronx and is comprised of 541 students in grades Pre-K through five. P.S. 25 serves a primarily Hispanic community (87%), including more than 97 English Language Learners (18%) and a special education population of 163 students (30%). At PS. 25 The Bilingual School, we pride ourselves on providing a continuum of services for students with disabilities. Within our school we have the Horizon Program. The Horizon Program targets students who have been diagnosed with Autism. The program targets the students holistically. We not only scaffold the curriculum to ensure it engages 0  all types of learners to ensure academic gains, our school addresses social emotional concerns through the ACE curriculum. The ACE lessons are individualized and promote healthy and appropriate social norms. Within this framework, we provide a part time 12:1 monolingual self contained program that service grades K-5. This program allows students to participate in general education classes but also provided small group instruction to ensure academic progress. Another component to the continuum is the 12:1 bilingual self contained program for grades K-5. Students are provided with a scaffold, common core aligned curriculum in the students native language when necessary. Integrated co-teaching is another program in our school. There is one ICT class for each grade level. These classes are designed so our students remain in the general education setting but receive academic support as well have the opportunity to learn from their peers. Special Education Teacher Support Service is a program targeting students who have made significant strides but require very little reinforcement to succeed in a general education class. Once this service has been provided with success students are then considered for de certification. We need to continue to support English Language Learners with language development as well as developing comprehension strategies that demonstrate student mastery of grade level standards. We also need to continue to support Special Ed Students with academic and social emotional growth while embedding differentiated rigorous tasks. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. We have seen an improvement in Rigorous Instruction as measured by the increase of proficiency on the ELA and Math NYS tests. Plus, evidence of a Supportive Environment because of the implementation of effective school-wide social emotional learning systems. Below is outlined some of our strengths, accomplishments and areas of focus: ● The PS 25 exploration center focuses on child-centered, collaborative learning, using creative and innovative methods and interactive technology. Students are challenged academically and are exposed to varied cultural and social experiences and learning opportunities. The exploration center is used for inquiry activities and animal observation. The interactive center allows students to cultivate plants, and observe fish, birds, turtles, and other insects. Math manipulatives are used to aid students in grasping concepts. ● The comprehensive Literacy Tracking sheets which allow teachers to enter data for Fountas & Pinnell Benchmarks, Writing Baseline/Endline assessments and students’ pre/post writing assessment pieces. ● Teachers work collaboratively on and across the grades to plan using the comprehensive curriculum maps. Weekly- Monday & Tuesday professional learning time gives teachers the time to design, reflect and adjust instructional objectives in a timely manner. ● P.S. 25 Parents are an integral part of the school community. The school offers many opportunities for parents to share in the education of their children through regular workshops, family nights, partnership activities and school celebrations. ● The celebration of the children’s academic achievements are displayed throughout the building. We’re proud of the fact that we provide the children of the community with a balanced educational experience. ● Classrooms are equipped with an average of two - four desktop computers as well as Smartboards and Triumph boards. Additionally, most classrooms have laptops and ALL students have IPADS to accommodate center based learning activities. 1  ● In a large diverse population we are most proud of our ability to effectively adjust and design the educational plans to accommodate our student population. Using a variety of intervention resources, we are able to provide targeted support for struggling students. ● Children identified in specific at-risk sub-groups, i.e. Special Needs and ENL students, are provided with additional academic support. This includes the following: mainstreaming of children, pull-out/push-in support staff, using technology and implementing RTI research based programs to support learning. All students are placed in the least restrictive environment as per their need. ● Teachers track the lowest third students in reading in their classes and provide them with Guided Reading support. Student growth is tracked with the R.T.I tracker and this helps close the achievement gap. The key areas of focus this year will concentrate on the specific areas denoted in the Quality Review and Principal Performance Observation. Both documents indicated an area of focus on 1.2 with a specific concentration to work with teacher teams to develop differentiated workstation activities to ensure we meet the needs of all students. We will also address Rigorous Instruction using the Danielson Framework in the areas of 3D Assessing Students and 3C Engaging Students in Learning. Teachers will also implement the TAPPLE protocol (checking for understanding) that will verify students are learning while the teacher is teaching. We will continue to focus on writing instruction with in the content areas and developing meaningful and engaging discussion techniques. Additionally, we will develop a student led initiative in order to have all students participate in at least one student led conference this school year. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X025 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 540 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 82 81 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 93.0% % Reduced Lunch 16.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 87.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.08 0% 9% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 39.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 83% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 30 16 90.8% 2.4% 27.6% 9.8% 1.3% 0.4% 4 0% 8 50.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A comprehensive assessment was completed using information from the Principal Performance Observation visit, formal/informal teacher observations done through the ADVANCE web application and ELA/Math data analysis. It was determined that in many cases teachers were not consistent in articulating next steps to students for guidance, checking for understanding or extending their thinking as they solved tasks. The analysis indicates the school still needs to develop 1.2, which includes the following: ● Effective instruction that yields high quality student work with effective assessment of daily learning. ● A shared belief informed by the Danielson Framework and aligning pedagogy and curricula ● Teaching strategies to provide multiple entry points that engage all learners and creating higher levels of student thinking and participation which culminate in meaningful work products An analysis of our Advance teacher observational data as indicated in our MOSL 2017-2018 teacher observational data shows that we will need to continue to focus on improving teacher practice in Domain 3 specifically the areas of 3c and 3d of the Danielson Framework. Our goal is to further increase student achievement, especially for our lowest third students and student sub-groups, using these components. Our goal is to have an increase of 65% in Components 3c and 3d of the Danielson Framework. Our strength lies in our dedicated staff, as they are committed to improving upon their teacher practice, in order to increase the quality of student work. This is evidenced by work captured in student portfolios and teachers providing students with actionable feedback in 1:1 and small group conferences. Our priority needs will include the following: implement the TAPPLE (check for understanding) protocol   develop, implement, and monitor writing the constructed response. The focus will be to write routinely over shorter time frames (a single sitting or a day or two) for a range of discipline-specific tasks, purposes, and audiences.  work collaboratively with teachers to better improve upon their teaching practices and support their instructional goals as aligned to the Danielson Framework  work collaboratively with teachers to improve upon differentiating instruction by developing lesson modifications, tiered tasks and embedding a variety of quality questions that engage all learners 4  develop actionable teacher to student feedback with targeted next step that will show evidence of student progress based on the daily learning objective findings  develop creative ways to enhance classroom discourse that encourage student-student and student-teacher interaction. identify students in the lowest third and sub-group share best practices of highly effective teachers in addressing the lowest third students needs    plan targeted professional development to support teachers in addressing the individual needs of all students  with a focus on sub groups revisit instructional plans to ensure lessons plans and hands on activities that are differentiated to support all sub-groups #1 Reading and Writing Assessments During the 2017-2018 school year, our school administered a series of reading and writing assessments: Reading Assessments: Findings: The Fountas & Pinnell results at the conclusion of the 2017-2018 school year indicated that 46% of students were performing at a level 2. Pre/Post Writing Assessments: Findings: Authentic pre and post writing tasks were administered in order to assess students' writing skills (narrative, informative/explanatory, and opinion). The analysis of these authentic assessments administered at the start and at the end of the unit provided teachers with patterns and trends in writing. The pre-assessments identified specific traits of writing which needed to be addressed through whole group and small group instruction while the post assessments were a reflected the skills the students' had acquired and were able to incorporate independently in their writing. The data generated was used to revise the units of study and to create lessons that supported identified areas based on the findings. Evidence from informal Observations: As per the Danielson rubric, evidence from observations/evaluations indicated a need for teachers to engage in more guided instruction through modeling and explicit teaching. During the feedback planning conversations, strategies were provided for teachers to design targeted learning tasks based on analysis of student work, and multiple sources of data. Professional learning sessions were initiated during the school year to provide teachers with instructional support in the areas mentioned. Strengths : ● As evidenced through observations, teachers are using running records to create guided reading groups ● Teachers use writing exemplars that scaffold and support the current unit of study (process charts, criteria and rubrics) 5  Mathematics Part 1----Needs Assessment When provided with the appropriate tools, strategies and blueprint to follow teachers will commit themselves to the success and improvement of their craft and the improvement of student achievement. Data from informal observations in the ADVANCE WEB Application and the data collected through diagnostic, formative and summative assessments suggests that: STRENGTHS  Professors used PD time provided to look at student work through the assessments that were administered through the cycles of inquiry.  Additional resources to support instruction ; Engage NY, Think Central Platform Interventions such as Grab & Go, Enrich and Re-teach strategic and intensive interventions, customized, culturally responsive performance tasks and/or test preparations were designed and implemented for grades 3-5. o Majority of teachers showed improvement in crafting lessons that were standards based, and demonstrated a better understanding on developing academic rigor within the learning tasks.  Formative assessments were done periodically, collected and recorded as per school-wide assessment plan. This data was disaggregated to check for trends across race, ethnicity, gender, SWDs, ENL learners in our school-wide effort to close the achievement gap for historically disenfranchised populations.  Majority of teachers know GO Math content vertically for their grade, and the grades above and below their respective grade.  Majority utilized 'turn and talk' to help students verbalize their ideas before sharing with the class and in order to continue their discussions.  Most teachers planned as a grade team and met with grade leaders during common time to share strengths/weaknesses of strategies. and performance tasks that revealed themselves to be effective. NEEDS:  There were still pockets in using the technology components contained on the Think Central platform strategically.  Exit Tickets/reflections/share-outs were not structured in a manner where evidence of the mathematical practices were clearly defined.  Diagnostic inventories on prerequisite skills necessary for entry into a new chapter and/or area of focus   within the mathematical domain were not performed with fidelity. Integration of mathematical concepts within other content areas to create multiple pathways and connections to learning were inconsistent. Families requested more support and/or workshops on how best to meet the needs on the scholars at home, so learning can be two-pronged.  Grade-level meetings were inconsistent and most of the time a 'laundry list' was the focus.  Math conversations are sporadic and not taking place in all classrooms #2 Apple Grant Tablets: Although a good number of teachers used the I-pads during instruction to enhance the GO math lessons. The aim is for whole school implementation #3 Continuation of Building Familiarity and Capacity with GO MATH: Data used: diagnostic inventory (Show What You Know) formative assessments (mid-chapter/ end-line chapter assessments), standards based performance tasks composed of math standards tested on NYS exam 6  Findings: September 2017 preliminary results indicates that the majority of students in Grade 1 were 15% approaching and 85% meeting the Math CCLS standards. In grades 3-5 MOSL EOY, students in grade 3 were 47% approaching, 17% meeting and 19% strategic. In grade 4, 24% were approaching, 30% meeting and 30% strategic. In grade 5, 42% were approaching, 17% meeting and 31% strategic in meeting the Math CCLS standards. As a result of these findings, there are indications that students in grades 3-5 would benefit from more intense small guided group instruction and intentional emphasis on the math standards and mathematical practices Additionally, in order to alleviate this; a year-long instructional guide has been developed to assist teachers with math instruction, planning and assessments. This guide will allow teacher teams to continue to plan together, administer exit tickets consistently, assign homework, continue with and further develop math talk with students. Teachers will also now be able to fully integrate math guided groups during instruction and use intervention with those students who have a need. As per school-wide assessment calendar for 2018-19 and the year-long instructional guide teachers will administer their grade-specific assessments (diagnostic, formative and summative). Teachers will use GO Math Exit Tickets and Task Performance tests as indicators of progress, to adjust their teaching and to form new guided math groups. Teachers will continue administering, collecting and analyzing the data collected at intervals during instruction. This information will be used to form and support guided math groups and to determine which students need additional support through RTI. Assistant Principals will now chair all Grade-level meetings to unpack and deepen the math curriculum In September 2018, the pre-requisite math assessment will serve as an instructional tool and will indicate which students might need additional instruction and support. In January 2019 the NYCPT MOSL (BOY) will serve as a tool to further support classroom instruction. In March 2019 the (MOY) will probably not be administered. Instead Focus will be on the Performance Tasks and the Exit Tickets. In June 2019 the NYCPT MOSL (EOY) will serve as an indicator of progress along with other criteria for promotional purposes. Additionally, for grades 3-5 the fall and spring simulations will also be used as instructional tools. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Comparing the results of the 2017 and 2018 ELA and Math test constructed response student answers, by June 2019, 50% of students at PS 25 will demonstrate growth in their ELA and Math scores. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning will take place once a week on Mondays after school for all teachers. They will use a variety of tools to impact positive change. All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 All teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Professional Learning Team & Administrators Teachers, Professional Learning Team & Administrators All teachers & Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Coaches, teachers, administrators and consultants Teachers & students in grades 2-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Teacher leaders, coaches and consultants Professional development will be differentiated to meet the needs of all teachers. Targeted professional development will be provided to all teachers to ensure strategies are embedded in daily teaching to support Special Needs and ENL students across all grades. Such strategies include vocabulary development with use of visual aides to promote and encourage student discussion, language acquisition, variety of concept webs for content related topics of study. Reading: Teachers will continue to implement guided reading instruction to students while targeting the strategies and skills to improve comprehension. This is driven by the Fountas & Pinnell and running records assessments. Teachers will continue to implement the Open Court Phonics program and introduce MyOn to deepen foundational skills, increase comprehension and increase stamina during independent reading. Writing: Develop, implement and monitor the use of Accountable Talk as a strategy to engage students in rigorous discussion that leads to improving citing evidence to support text and conclusions. Teacher led writing conferences will identify the differentiated needs of each student based on the genre criteria. Students will conduct peer conferences that are annotated. Writing celebrations, constructed responses to the content learning will be used to determine student understandings of the essential question around the content being studied. Math: All teachers will assist students to organize their learning and understanding of the math concepts and ideas presented through small guided math groups, This will be driven by the Performance Tasks and Exit Tickets. Teachers & students in grades 2-5 Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Teacher Leaders, Teacher Assistants, Coaches and Administration Teacher leaders will provide math support with school-wide initiatives and best practices. 8 Teachers will adapt/modify their mathematics pacing calendars in order to meet the needs of their populations. Teachers will be provided with GO Math units, and diagnostic resources which are aligned to the State Standards. As a school, we will develop family math workshops, and distribute math tools for the year, and school to home letters that will better inform our parents as to grade level expectations. Trust will be gained by setting norms and expectations to establish a positive working environment for all staff. Teachers Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers receive weekly mentoring sessions where they are provided with pedagogical strategies and resources. These resources and coaching sessions build teacher practice and provide a pathway to professional growth. New teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Professional Learning Team and Administrators Mentor teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Ps 25 will engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home by establishing a Saturday Family Academy. The Academy will focus on STEam, Phonemic Awareness, early reading strategies, Academic Language building, computer Science , ENL and cultural awareness, Response for intervention and health awareness. The school is part of the Family English Chancellor's Initiative. The Principal's Monthly "Second Cup of Coffee" Family workshops and experiences will continue. Evening Family Nights will provide families with a multitude of hands-on experience, and learning alongside your child opportunities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional task created by instructional & curriculum teams   performance tasks  Data team  Consultants  Coaches  Assistant principals Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 9  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2018, at least 25% of students will see an increase in their constructed response answers as measured by the NYS 2 point rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Ready Interim assessments will be used as the instrument of measure to assess midyear progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The School Quality Snapshot demonstrated the school does "good" in providing a supportive environment, therefore a more detailed focus in this area will be expanded.  Based on our incident report data, the highest percentage of occurrences happened during class instruction and cafeteria. By June 2019, the school will continue to implement a positive behavior Incentive programs (ClassDojo, Brain Power) embedded to developing "The Five P's: Prompt, Prepared, Productive, Polite & Perseverance" which will decrease in behavioral incidents as evidenced in the OORS reports.  Based on the academic and social needs of our students with IEPs, and many of those students being recommended for an integrated collaborative setting, we now have an ICT class for every grade level. Through the ICT model, we will provide students with an opportunity to learn and thrive academically and socially. Students will be able to work in strategic small instructional groups where concepts will be scaffold to ensure retention of information. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will expand on the positive behavior program to reflect "The Five P's: Prompt, Prepared, Productive, Polite and Perseverance" incorporating Restorative practices and social-emotional learning that will result in a 15% decrease the behavioral incidents as evidenced in the OORS reports. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The ICT teachers will engage in professional learning cycles where they study the collaborative teaching models. The assistant principals will monitor via Focused Walkthroughs teacher practice on implementing the models to target instruction. The ICT classroom teachers & students Monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 Every class from Kindergarten to 5th grade will implement the Brain Power initiative for social and emotional wellness. All teachers & students Bi-monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 Targeted students will engage in informal daily check-ins, special meetings with their advisers to help increase motivation, attendance, self-worth, social attributes etc. all to support social emotional learning. Parent workshops will be delivered on implementing strategies for encouraging positive behaviors both at home and school using the DOJO point system via technology. All parents & students Bi-monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 A series of parent workshops will be provided on how assessments are used for grading students and creating lessons that target the areas that are in need of improvement. All parents & students Monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 Guidance counselors will be available to meet with student during cafeteria time because of high incidents and so they can defuse conflicts. Advisers will also become available from time to time to complete check-ins with students. Staff Weekly Sept 2018-June 2019 assistant principals, teacher leaders, peer mentors, consultants and paraprofessionals. Brain Power trainers, assistant principals, teacher leaders, peer mentors, and paraprofessionals. assistant principals, teacher leaders, peer mentors, and paraprofessionals. Parent coordinator, assistant principals, teacher leaders, peer mentors, consultants and paraprofessionals. guidance counselors and social worker 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2   Teacher teams will work collaboratively facilitating at least five parent workshops throughout the year   focused on promoting positive behavior from students Share school-wide initiatives (Dojo Brain Power,) with all families Share ongoing progress with implementing 5P's and Brain Power with parents and other school community stakeholders Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Brain Power  Data team  Brain Power trainer  Teacher per session and per diem  Assistant principals per session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of school-wide implementation of a positive behavior program, including restorative practices, there will be a 15% reduction in incidents, as measured by the OORS report for the period of September 2018 to February 2019, compared to the OORS report for the period from September 2017 to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The appropriate instrument of measure will be OORS reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis from the 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide and Framework Elements indicates a decrease of 4% in Collaborative Teachers from 2016-2017 data. A further analysis indicates that in the area of of teachers having opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school only 79% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that teachers have these opportunities. Although teachers work collaboratively planning, modifying, assessing, and analyzing student data. We need to embed more team time to build pedagogy and cohesive planning amongst colleagues. Priorities will include: -implementing an extra common time period weekly for teachers to engage in conversations around best practices and inquiry. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of all teachers participating in collaborative teacher teams, focused on analyzing assessment data, and planning for daily checks for understanding that include assessment criteria , the average MOTP rating for component 3d (Assessment) will be at least 3.25 out of 4.0 for the 2018-2019 school year. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School Based Teacher leaders Curriculum Team Generation Ready Consultant Administration  Teachers will participate in Professional Learning to All teachers Weekly Sept 2018-June 2019 deepen the component of engagement to drive instruction  Design learning tasks that allow students to have more peer to peer discussions and to engage with content through group work with the teacher as facilitator  Engage teachers and students in self-assessment and reflection  Use diagnostic assessment extensively to move students towards meeting the standard  Teachers will use "analyzing student work" protocols during team meetings  Administrators will conduct rounds in order to provide support to the teacher teams and also have discussions with teachers regarding implementation of the team work  PLC meetings have been targeted to focus on looking at student work and developing next steps based on the findings. these meetings have been assigned specific dates on the calendar. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administrators, teachers and the parent coordinator provide parents with workshops (at least three throughout the year) on how they can work collaboratively with teachers to support and enhance the education of their children. The school website will be used as an Information Hub for parents to learn about the school and its programs; individual classroom websites will be developed and implemented to communicate classroom related information to families. Family Handbook - an informative document that compiles all school related information that is relevant to families, published on the school website and available in more than one language 5  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Professional learning resources and materials, copies, and per session for teachers and supervisors. Human Resources  Professional development and learning walks will be facilitated by the coaches, assistant principals and the consultant. Observations debrief sessions will be conducted by the instructional team. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of all teachers participating in collaborative teacher teams, focused on analyzing assessment data, and modifying instruction to create multiple entry points for all learners, the average MOTP rating in component 3d (assessment) will be at least 3.0 out of 4.0. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instrument of measure to be used to assess progress will be Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to address feedback from NYC School Quality Guide and Advance data we have revised our instructional focus to be: "We, the scholars and professors at PS 25, will implement checks for understanding to validate our thinking and demonstrate our knowledge in everyday learning." With the continued implementation of Advance, it is essential to nurture teachers in support of rigorous instruction. STRENGTHS: School leaders consistently communicate high expectations   Distributed leadership structures (committees, grade leaders, etc.) are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership and teachers play an integral role in key decisions that affect student learning across the school Sign-in sheets serve as a system of accountability Shared school goals in whole-staff meeting and posted in all rooms Fully functional system is established to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practice based on student data and teacher feedback    NEEDS:  Increase participation rates by engaging students on the periphery by providing high quality supports and extensions into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and SWDs, are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in student work products  Multiple entry points for all learners especially the lowest and highest-achieving students, ELLs and SWDs  Student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student thinking, participation, and ownership across the vast majority of classrooms  Revise mission statement to communicate high expectations (professionalism, instruction, communication, and other elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching)  Consistently communicate high expectations and provide training, resulting in a culture of mutual accountability for those expectations  Partner with families to support student progress toward those expectations Part 2 – Annual Goal 7  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of supervisors' observations and feedback to teachers on their implementation of Responsive Classroom strategies, there will be an increase from 88% to 92% of all teachers receiving end of year Advance MOTP ratings of at least Effective in component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning, compared to teachers' end of year Advance MOTP ratings in component 3c during SY 2017-2018. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, APs, coaches, and consultant RESEARCH-BASED INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAMS: teachers Our K-5 teachers have had much success these past two years launching the Ready New York CCLS English Language Arts program. The Ready New York CCLS English Language Arts program uses a proven-effective, gradual-release model that ensures students get the modeled and guided instruction they need to build confidence and mastery of the CCLS, while providing point-of-use professional development for teachers to help them teach the CCLS most effectively. Built from the ground up to be true to the details and intent of the Common Core Learning Standards, Ready New York CCLS is a rigorous instruction and practice program that fully prepares students for the CCLS in a highly supportive way. Our K-5 teachers have also had success with the GO Math! series. Go Math uses a proven effective model that ensures that students get modeled and guided instruction needed to build mastery of the CCLS, while providing online support for both teachers and students. GO Math! is updated yearly to meet the CCLS standards and to help teachers teach more effectively. Professional Development: Our Professional Development Committee has planned sessions with a heavy emphasis on Engaging Students in Learning. parents teachers Monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, APs and teachers Observations and Feedback: Through the adoption of the Danielson Framework, teachers have begun to receive more feedback on their use of engagement techniques. Teachers that struggle and excel in this area will be identified. This process will continue next year and inter-visitations and demo lessons by coaches are always available to support our teachers. There will be at least bimonthly cabinet meetings to ensure all supervisors and coaches are aware of what’s going on in classrooms. Bi-weekly Sept 2018-June 2019 9 PARENT INVOLVEMENT: parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Principal, APs, coaches Monthly workshops will be offered to engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core so families can support their children at home. Coaches, ENL service providers, and classroom teachers will offer workshops. Workshops will focus on helping parents understand the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessments, the NYS ELA exam, and how to help their child when reading at home. The progress report was also modified to more closely match the report card so that parents will have a better idea of how their child is meeting grade-level benchmarks. STRATEGIES TO ADDRESS STUDENTS IN SUBGROUPS: Our teachers work in teams to improve their practice by looking at student work and finding ways to provide specific, constructive and actionable feedback in order to improve student writing. Furthermore, using the Danielson Framework for Teaching, supervisors provide feedback to teachers on an individual basis following informal and formal classroom observations, thus creating conditions that lead to student success for our high needs students. During teacher planning time, teachers modify their individual plans to scaffold lessons for our Sped and ELL populations. This is evidenced by use of graphic organizers, visual representations of vocabulary, and sentence starters. Teachers (especially SpEd and ENL teachers), students (the bottom third including ELLs and SWDs) Sept 2018-June 2019 Administrators, teachers, teacher leaders, coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher teams will facilitate workshops to support and engage parents through a collaborative partnership. Teachers will co-facilitate workshops with parents as well in order to better support their children. The Parent Coordinator will also facilitate workshops to foster parent engagement and better support the home school connection. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers salaries, per session for teachers, Per Diem 0  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of supervisors' observations and feedback to teachers on their implementation of Responsive Classroom strategies, there will be an increase from 88% to 92% of all teachers receiving at least 2 Advance ratings of at least Effective in component 3c: Engaging Students in Learning during the period of September 2018 to February 2019, as compared to teachers' ratings in component 3c during the period of September 2017 to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instrument of measure to be used to assess progress will be Advance MOTP. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Results- Strengths: • parents say that they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance • teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet student needs Priority Needs: • lack of opportunity to volunteer time often to support our school Overall: • among the six elements for the Framework for Great Schools, our score for the category Strong Family-Community Ties indicated a need to bolster the strategies we use to engage parents in school activities Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of increased opportunities for parent engagement within the school. there will be at least a 5% increase in positive responses to questions related to parent satisfaction, as evidenced by the 2018-2019 School Learning Environment survey. compared to parents' positive responses to such questions on the 2017-2018 School Learning Environment survey. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parent Engagement Time: Monday from 2:45 to 3:10 pm is a designated time for teachers to have weekly opportunities to contact parents by phone or set up individual parent meetings. This year we will be working on student-led conferences. By welcoming valuing families, and including them in the school community, the school builds a strong partnership that leads to student success. Parent Workshops: A survey will be sent home to gauge parent interest and preferences. Workshops are provided at least once a month for parents. They range from topics like: Understanding Your Child’s Reading Level, Homework Help, Preparing for the State Tests, and Gearing up for the Next Grade. The workshops will take place during the Saturday Family Academy, and Family Nights throughout the year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents Monthly teachers, parent coordinator Sept 2018-June 2019 Parents Monthly Sept 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, SLT members, PA board and teachers If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. PS 25 Parent Association, ASPIRA of New York Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The allocation of funds will be used to purchase professional materials for study, resources to build family literacy and per-session/per-diem for faculty facilitation of workshops and training. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, as a result of increased opportunities for parent engagement within the school. there will be at least 80% positive responses to questions related to parent satisfaction, as evidenced by a school-created survey with comparable questions to the NYC Learning Environment Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The monthly collection and review of the agendas, surveys and workshop feedback provided at each session. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students performing below grade level based on Fountas & Pinnell, reading & writing assessments, the 2018 ELA test results and student portfolios Students performing below grade level based on math state exam 2018, periodic assessments, unit tests and student portfolios Students performing below grade level based on baseline assessments and end of year assessment Students performing below grade level based on baseline assessments and end of year assessment Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Leveled guided reading Small group instruction Foundations On- on-one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school day After school Reading recovery Push- in model & pull out ration 3/1 Small target group instruction 4X a week for 45 minutes Test sophistication Guided math instruction Small group instruction and one –on one EDM games During school day After school Word problems Math Drills Test taking skills Thematic units Integrated curriculum Test prep grade 4 Thematic units Baseline, mid line and end year writing assessments Small group instruction and one –on one During school day After school Small group instruction and one –on one During school day After school 5  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students mandated by IEP & teacher recommendation Tier RTI Small group instruction and one –on one During school day Counseling 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) PS 25 has identified 22 students in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services available for students are guidance counseling, tutorial sessions through after-school programs, RTI, material and resources for the personalized needs. STH are provided with assistance in school supplies, uniform, special events fees and individualized needs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies for recruitment: ● Each new teacher is assigned a mentor, who is an experienced classroom teacher, to assist with curriculum as well as classroom management. Both Mentors and new teachers are trained in using the Danielson Framework as a tool for success. ● Weekly New Teacher meetings are held by the coaches to address the needs of new teachers. New classroom teachers receive staff development in the areas of: test taking strategies, ongoing student assessment, the P.S. 25 Curriculum calendars for all subject areas, and extensive training in examining student work and classroom management. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In 2018-2019 school year, PS 25 will be hiring new teachers. In order to support the teachers in their first and second year or those that are not highly qualified a mentor coach will be assigned. The New Teacher Center initiative for District 7 will provide highly qualified and highly effective teacher support to those in need. Administrative staff including the Principal and Assistant Principals attend District and Professional Development sessions. As an outcome of this professional development, new programs are created or existing programs are improved in order to increase student achievement. We are committed to providing an educational environment that incorporates the most up-to-date research driven strategies and successful literacy and math programs. ● Teachers and paraprofessionals attend Professional Development sessions throughout the year focused on curriculum development and alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards. Professional development is provided by administration and coaches. The school's Professional Learning Team consists of teachers, administrators and coaches. This team creates a yearlong calendar for Professional Learning that reflects the needs of the staff as determined by the twice yearly needs assessment. Six week Professional Learning cycles are held during the Monday Professional Learning Time and are continued at grade level meetings and other meetings scheduled during common 9  preps. Each cycle is followed by a share-out where the entire staff gathers to share what they have been learning about teaching and learning and how this has resulted in increased student achievement. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We provide monthly workshops for families to engage in curriculum, social and behavioral awareness. While providing support to individual families based on meeting the needs of the whole child. To ensure continuity from Pre-K to Kindergarten within the school, Pre-K teachers collaborate with Kindergarten teachers throughout the year to familiarize themselves with the CCLS standards. School leaders and our Parent Coordinator also attend PD sessions with early childhood programs to ensure that our curriculum is aligned. Annual June Orientation meetings with incoming Kindergartners and parents in May and June, allows us to begin establishing a relationship with families and provides the time to outline school goals and expectations. On the first day of school in September all Kindergartens are accompanied to school with parents and are given the opportunity to visit the classroom for the morning session. During this time they have an opportunity to meet the teacher and learn about the instructional expectations for the year. This conversation is continued during the September Parent-Teacher conference held in mid-September. School leaders review records to ensure students are provided with the appropriate intervention services. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All teachers participate in weekly professional development sessions that include time to discuss, reflect and review assessments and plan accordingly. ● RTI bi-monthly meetings provide time for all constituents to meet and monitor student progress and to adjust instructional plans as needed based on teacher designed assessments 0  ● Planning sessions with teachers on and across grades throughout the school year allow for open dialogue and time to review and determine the best instructional materials to incorporate materials by staff. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Academic Rigor Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 401,789.00 Title II, Part A Federal 85,440.00 Title III, Part A Federal 12,012.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,554,074.00 X X X Supportive Environment Family Involvement Academic Rigor Supportive Environment Academic Rigor Supportive Environment 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 1  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. PS 25 School –Parent Involvement Policy 2018-2019 Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 25, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 25 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 3  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; 4  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-2019 Dear Families, School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Parent Compact is an agreement between the parents and the school. Great educations relies upon a strong family and learning community relationship. We value our collaboration with our parent community. Please read, then sign and return below. P. S. 25, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 5  School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 6  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 7  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Tear Off and return to your Child’s Teacher “ I have read the Parent Compact and agree with the Policy” Child’s name______________________________________ Class_____________________ Parent Signature_______________________________ Date:________________________ 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our English Language Learners require academic language development and literacy support in the areas of reading comprehension and writing in English. Based on the recent Fountas and Pinnell and ELA simulation data, we found that our ELL students struggle with understanding passages in order to create short and extended responses that support different types of genres. In order to address these academic needs, we will use the data from multiple sources: F & P, Interim ELA Ready, Pre & Post writing assessments. We will use results from these data sources to target reading comprehension writing skills through small group instruction during the Title III After School and Saturday Program. The small group targeted instruction will focus on developing and building literacy through the areas of Phonics, Phonological Awareness, High-Frequency Words, Vocabulary, Comprehension of Literature, and Informational Text. The language of instruction will be in English. Assessment and instruction are offered for both reading comprehension of informational and literary texts. The after school program will be offered Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:45pm -3:45pm, beginning November 2, 2018 to April 11, 2019. There will be four common branch certified teachers and one supervisor. Each teachers will teach a group of 20 students Each group will be divided as follows: 2nd Grade: 20, 3rd grade: 20, 4th grade:20 and 5th grade: 20 (80 students in total). Teachers will plan for differentiated instruction based on weekly data analysis of student assessments. Teachers will teach groups of students and create targeted instruction in the following areas: Lessons on High- Frequency word recognition, word study ( word-building activities and instruction in phonics and patterns of language through word-study activities). Lessons on close reading will be provided where students will have the opportunities to engage with both literature and informational texts. Focused instruction on word meaning and key academic vocabulary prior to reading the passages to build conceptual understanding of words. In addition, students will have opportunities to build their fluency by repeated reading and fluency activities. There will also be lessons focused on comprehension strategies for informational texts and Literature. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 0  Part C: Professional Development Workshops will be provided to our teaches in order to prepare them to teach and support our students using scaffolding strategies by the ELL coordinator. The Professional Development topics to be covered are Comprehension Strategies for Struggling Readers, duration/timeframe: 1 hour within first to second week of program. High Order Thinking Skills, duration/timeframe: 1.5 hours, completed within 2nd to 3rd week of program. Vocabulary Strategies for ELLs, duration/timeframe: 1hour, within 3rd to 4th week of prgram. In addition, teachers will use approximately 30 minutes every other week of their professional learning time to collectively review the data once a week. The data will support teachers with adapting individualized instruction based on student specific need in ELA. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: A workshop for parents will be provided for them to understand and help their child with reading comprehension questions. Jaqueline Garcia, one of the teachers will provide work session for parents offering training on types of questions to ask students after reading passages from assigned texts. In addition, parents will also be trained on reading comprehension strategies that support ELA and Math needs. These sessions will be offered twice a month on Tuesdays from 2:45pm- 3:45pm during the duration of the after school program. Parents will be notified via letters sent home informing them of the after school program and the parent work sessions. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum N/A N/A 1  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A n/a n/a n/a n/A n/a n/a n/a 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name The Bilingual School Borough Bronx School Number 25 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Carmen Toledo-Guerrero Coach Mario Varuzza ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jaqueline Garcia Teacher/Subject Area Erly Pena-Math Teacher/Subject Area Sandra Rivera-Literacy Related-Service Provider Maria Lopez Superintendent Richard Cintron Assistant Principal Yliucha Jaquez Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Dorothy Gutierrez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Therese Ebblewhite_Consultant C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 9 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 507 3 Total number of ELLs 69 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.61%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish/English If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 K 1 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 5 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 6 0 0 0 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P.S. 25's instructional plan is to provide all English language learners with a quality instructional program that supports academic and social development. Emphasis will be placed on providing students with the greatest possible access to the core curriculum and afford students access to appropriate English language instruction that will ensure progress from limited English proficiency to fluent English proficiency. To assess literacy skills for our ELLs, P.S. 25 uses the following formative assessments to plan instruction: Phonemic Awareness assessment in English and Spanish, and the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System in English and in Spanish. The assessments are administered and used as a bench marking tool three times a year (September, January and May). Once the data is analyzed, teachers then begin to do running records using the Bee-Bop Spanish assessment and Reading A-Z for those students who are emerging, transitioning or expanding. Running records provide teachers with on-going data, enabling them to tailor lessons/instruction to meet the linguistic and academic needs of all students. Writing assessments which are aligned to our reading curriculum are 4  administered in English and Spanish throughout the school year on a monthly basis in order to monitor student growth and progress in writing. The data provides a lens and a starting point for reading, writing, speaking and listening. At the beginning of each writing unit of study, students are assessed through an "on demand" writing prompt. These baseline and end line assessment pieces serve as a benchmark for teachers to flag targeted areas where students are lacking the strategies they need to become proficient writers. The teachers meet as a team and discuss observational patterns and trends as identified by the data. They use this information to create action plans based on individual student needs. The findings have been consistent over the years. Our "ELL" students have challenges with reading comprehension as well as writing to inform, explain and retell. Time allotments for the different levels of English Language Proficiency: Entering, Emerging, Transitional and Expanding are the following: •Beginning and Emerging students receive 360 minutes weekly of ENL/ELA depending on model used instruction using ESL methodologies and comprehension strategies. (Stand alone, integrated, Flexible) •Transitional and Expanding students receive a minimum of 180 minutes in ENL/ELA instruction using CALLA elements of academic language/ESL methodologies and comprehension strategies. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Literacy units of study are revised each year during common planning time and professional learning time in order to include lessons that address the patterns and trends found school wide. Insights gained from data analysis help in the development of effective curriculum, instructional practices and planning. They provide a lens for targeted professional learning sessions geared to meet the needs of all our students and teachers. Our goal is to deliver high quality content area instruction at academic grade level. This is necessary to develop conceptual understanding and learning strategies that will prepare ELL students to think critically, problem solve and be able to communicate in two languages. The formative data is used to support student need through small group instruction, one on one individual instruction and conferring. Students are provided with constructive feedback for next steps; teachers document findings as they meet with students individually. During common planning/writing inquiry sessions teachers revisit their conferring notes and student work to differentiate lessons and instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? For the past five years we have met our AYP goals with our ELL population. The NYSESLAT assessment results have continuously shown improvement and growth. Evaluation results are continually positive and demonstrate that the TBE program is very successful. We use the End of Unit NY Ready assessment, Go Math end of unit assessments, ELA and Math simulations and the NYS ELA and Math tests as our summative assessments. The following are the main strengths and successes identified through our evaluation: we continue to implement important aspects of the model with high fidelity, including the proposed distribution of language use (English/Spanish language) for the delivery of instruction. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The data from these assessments is used for teachers to incorporate into their lesson and instruction the use of visuals, scaffolding, differentiated instruction and direct vocabulary instruction. Teachers meet during their inquiry teams, common planning time and during professional learning sessions to plan targeted instruction based on data results. During breakout group work, teachers work with different groups of students, scaffolding their work and providing targeted feedback as the other groups work independently. Visuals and the use of technology serves as tool that makes content comprehensible for students. Students respond well to teachers’ use of a Smart board, especially when asked to actively carry out tasks on the Smart board. Parents are very pleased with the program and indicated that their children have made strong progress throughout the school year. Focus group data revealed that parents were generally satisfied with the amount of English that their children had learned over the course of the school year. Various parents reported observing their children reaching a notable comfort level in English and that it has made a difference in their confidence in speaking English in different contexts. Parents also strongly value the opportunity that their children have through the program to strengthen Spanish language development. 5  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Regardless of the level of English language proficiency, students who are identified as at risk in Tier 1 and Tier 2 are provided with research-supported intervention that targets the different domains in literacy in order to support competencies in reading, writing, listening and speaking. The language of the intervention corresponds with the language of classroom instruction and student proficiency level. The intensity of the intervention is based on several factors, such as the student’s degree of risk and his or her rate of progress. The intervention provides intensive, small-group reading intervention (3–6 students) for students who are at risk for reading problems. It emphasizes development of conversational as well as academic vocabulary. Although students who speak another language develop social proficiency within the context of everyday living, cognitive academic language proficiency is dependent on formal schooling. We monitor progress regularly to ensure that students are benefiting from the intervention and meeting their goals. The same assessment tools used to identify the students in Tier 1 are used to monitor progress in Tier 2. Before we consider a student for special education, we determine whether the student’s academic difficulties more likely reflect a learning disability or limited English proficiency. We compare the student’s rate of progress during intervention with other students of similar English language proficiency. Next, we conduct a comprehensive review of the student’s educational history, including an examination of: (a) the quality of the instruction provided in Tiers 1 and 2, and whether the instruction was matched to the student’s needs; (b) whether the critical components of literacy instruction were provided (refer to Tier 2); (c) the intensity, including the frequency and duration, of past interventions; (d) previous progress monitoring data, including initial performance, rate of progress, and whether past goals were met; and (e) the fidelity of intervention implementation (e.g., was the intervention consistently implemented as intended?). If it is determined that the student qualifies for Tier 3 (special education support): we either continue the intervention from Tier 2, with increased intensity, or develop a new intervention plan based on the student’s needs and continue to monitor rate of progress frequently and regularly. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data patterns and trends of NYSESLAT, ELA,and Math state tests, and formative assessment scores are used to evaluate and inform the ELL program in our school. We concluded that across the four modalities of reading, writing, listening and speaking, reveal that students perform higher in the listening and speaking components of both the NYSESLAT assessment in grades K-5. In grades 2-5 data shows that students are having difficulty in the areas of reading comprehension and writing. components of the test. The ELL Data Analysis Tool revealed that across grades K-5 are ELLs scored low in the modality of writing and high in the modality of speaking. This data will continue to used to provide targeted interventions to our ELLs in the area of writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Assistant principals and instructional coaches meet with teacher teams once a month to engage in data dialogues. During theses meetings , we discuss data patterns and trends and highlight academic and linguistic needs of our students. We plan for small group strategy/targeted instruction, RtI, and differentiated lessons based on ability and needs of our students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 6  Our school offers a Freestanding ENL program. Students in our ENL program receive all instruction in English. The number of ENL instructional units that a student receives is determined by the student English language proficiency levels, (as determined by the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT scores.) These services are provided through two different instructional models: 1. Push in model: The ENL teacher works with Ell's during content area instruction in collaboration with classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support, while retaining their content instructional time period. 2. Pull out model: Students are grouped by grade and proficiency levels. The number of units that students receive is determined by their proficiency level. ENL instruction is intensive and depending on the group being seen the ENL provider uses the BICS (basic) or CALP (academic) approach. The ENL provider uses integrated content based thematic units to support and develop language through the content area. The technique focuses not only on learning a second language, but on using the language as a median to learn math, science, social studies or other academic subjects. b. TBE program. If applicable. Students in TBE programs learn language most effectively when they are able to transfer the knowledge they have in the language most familiar to them. Therefore, our Transitional Bilingual Program is designed so that our students develop comprehension and conceptual skills in their native language as they learn English in a risk free environment. The program includes an ENL component intended to develop skills in speaking, listening, reading and writing through the content areas, in order to develop and enhance communication skills. The TBE programs main objective is to provide grade level academic content to develop conceptual understanding and comprehension strategies that will prepare Ells to become critical thinkers, problem solvers and in turn be ble to communicate and perform academically in two languages. The students in TBE classes receive their ENL/HLA instruction component from their classroom teachers. The ESL provider meets regularly with Bilingual teachers to articulate and provide appropriate instructional ENL methodologies and strategies that support teacher instructional needs as well as those of their students. These sessions provide teachers with hands on content based lessons/tasks and activities that develop oral language, critical thinking, reading, writing, listening and speaking skills form which all our students benefit. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our ELLs are serviced through a combination of Pull Out and Push In services. The number of instructional units that an Ell student receives is determined by student proficiency levels based on the NYSITEL or NYSESLAT scores. Entering/Emerging level students receive 360 minutes a week of ENL instruction as per CR Part 154 via a push in or pull out program by the ESL teacher, Ms. Luis. Transitioning/Expanding level ELLs receive 180 minutes a week of ENL instruction as per CR Part 154. The students in TBE classes are integrated and receive math in HLA and social studies in ENL instruction component from their classroom teacher. The amount of minutes of ENL/HLA/ELA depend on student proficiency levels and determine what subjects to teach in either language. To ensure curricular alignment bilingual teachers focus on English language acquisition and comprehension strategies. This provides students the opportunity to obtain the additional academic content language they need and ensures that they meet/and or exceed New York State Next Generation Standards Draft. 7  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL provider works in collaboration with TBE classroom teachers to develop a plan of instruction to service the students and meet their linguistic needs. One of the initiatives of the school is to incorporate technology into content areas. Ms. Luis, the ENL Teacher has implemented using Literacy science and social studies through exploratory learning. One tier incorporates LAP tops/iPads, allowing the students to work independently at their own level on one of the pre-assigned activities within the software. The ENL teacher determines the activity based on student proficiency level, ability and need. The second tier is a push-in model in collaboration with three teachers: the technology teacher, the classroom teacher, and ENL Coordinator. There is much collaboration with regular classroom teachers to provide language acquisition and vocabulary support as it pertains to the content area being taught. Through rigorous instruction in the content areas students are exposed to academic vocabulary that takes them form their comfort zone to more challenging learning experiences. Ms. Garcia The ENL Coordinator have developed The Exploration Center for our ENL scholars to further support their language development through the content areas. The Exploration Center provides a print rich environment and engage students in hands on learning so students are physically involved using technology, manipulative and give them access to rich literature using the different center's library. The Exploration Centers allow our ENL students to work in cooperative groups that teach them the necessary social skills they need to interact productively with one another. Teachers are encourage to use The Exploration Center to support their teaching strategies that weaved together language and content instruction through the use of this amazing center. The TBE program provide academic content area instruction in English using ESL methodologies and strategies such as, scaffolding, modeling, questioning that support comprehension skills through an array of hands on lessons and activities to assist students to achieve the state designed level of English proficiency for their grade by providing curriculum that addresses all modalities and language needs either in Spanish or English depending on needs( HLA/NLA). To help Ells meet and/or exceed New York State ELA Standards as measured by interim assessments, teacher created assessments and/or city and state standardized assessment. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teachers use the Fountas and Pinnel Benchmark Spanish version to conduct running records for our Spanish Bilingual students. In addition, this school year we will be using interim and the end unit reading and writing assessments from our Calle de La Lectura Spanish curriculum to monitor student growth and progress. They develop goals and next steps based on the findings. Students are also given quick writes, where they must use the strategies for short response questions and then use these short responses to create an essay depending on their grade and their proficiency levels and ability. (quick writes, short response questions are translated for our beginners and emerging students) 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is scaffolded and differentiated based on the individual child’s English language proficiency in each of the four modalities, as well as what is developmentally appropriate for the child’s age and grade level. The coach, AIS teachers, and related service providers offer assistance in differentiating instruction to meet the needs of a multi-age class with mixed-proficiency levels and diverse needs to ensure that appropriate, research -based strategies, methods, and approaches are integrated into the ENL program and instruction. a. Currently we are not servicing any SIFE students. In the event that we need to service to a SIFE student, the student will be assessed and provided with the required ENL instruction in addition to any other intervention services found necessary. Additional services may include one on one tutoring, Academic Intervention Services, Extended Day program, parent support workshops or other available support services. Additionally, the ESL Teacher, classroom teachers, AIS teachers, and/or related service providers collaborate to develop a differentiated instructional plan to ensure that the academic and language learning 8  needs, as well as any additional special needs, of all SIFE students are addressed b. Newcomers receive targeted, differentiated instruction in the four modalities through Push In and Pull Out services, as we benefit from collaboration among the ESL teacher, classroom teachers, and ESL Coordinator, RTI/AIS teachers, and related service providers to ensure that the academic, linguistic, and other special needs are addressed. Newcomers who are in the testing grades receive additional academic and linguistic support through participation intervention services available at the school such as our after school program, Academic Intervention Services, "ASPIRA" after school Enrichment Program which offers tutoring and literacy through the arts with a focus in STEM connection through the content areas. c. Examination of students’ results in the four modalities as assessed by the NYSITEL/NYSESLAT indicates that the area of least proficiency for ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service is in reading and writing. Targeted instruction in these areas will be delivered to these students. The ESL teacher and classroom teachers work in collaboration with AIS teachers and related service providers to improve ELL progress in reading and writing, by developing individual goals for each of these students based on analysis of performance on the NYSESLAT and classroom performance. Both the ESL teacher , classroom teachers and ESL coordinator provide differentiated instruction designed to enable each student to achieve individual goals related to academics, language, and other special needs. d. We are currently not servicing any long term Ell's. Instead we are targeting and monitoring those students with 5 years in the ENL program. These students will be provided with the required amount of ENL instructional minutes based upon proficiency level as determined by NYSESLAT; in addition to other intervention services which may include one on one tutoring through the Academic Interventions Services ad after school program geared to literacy and math instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Special Education teachers implement the same literacy and content curricula as their General Education counterparts. Daily academic content area instruction in the classroom is differentiated according to ability and incorporates the use of research-based academic and language learning strategies that have been found to be successful with SWD ELLs, as well as scaffolding techniques, manipulatives, visuals, realia, hands -on activities, TPR, and music and movement to facilitate the acquisition of language and content area knowledge. The ESL Teacher and classroom teachers of ELL-SWDs collaborate to ensure that research-based ENL language learning strategies are integrated into each lesson-unit of study in order to support st student achievement in both academic and linguistic goals and objectives. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? PS 25 uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse academic and linguistic needs of ELL- SWDs within the least restrictive environment. All ELL-SWDs are placed in the least restrictive environment according to the requirements indicated on the most current IEP of each child. The ELL-SWDs whose IEPs require a paraprofessional are assigned a para-professional in the classroom. Additionally, paraprofessionals may accompany the ELL-SWDs to whom they a re are assigned to Pull-Out ESL services. All Special Education teachers implement the same literacy and content curricula as their General Education counterparts. The ENL Teacher, Special Education teachers, paraprofessionals, AIS teachers, and related service provider(s), collaborate to ensure that all ELL-SWDs are able to achieve curricular goals through support provided through scaffolded instruction that incorporates ENL teaching methods, differentiated learning strategies and other research based instructional practices that have been proven to be successful in making content comprehensible and further supporting English language acquisition for ELL-SWDs. Scheduling flexibility in the ENL program allows for the ESL Teacher to provide Push In services during content area studies as well as literacy instruction. Math and Science are integrated. Social Studies and ELA are taught separately. One teacher teaches two subjects simultaneously, !05 minutes are dedicated to both literacy/social studies, math/science. Schedules are staggered to ensure all content areas are equally served. We provide continuing transitional support for up to two years after ELL students reach proficiency on the NYSESLAT/ELA. In accordance with the NYSED requirement, former ELL students are entitled to the mandated two year extension of testing accommodations. Teachers of ELLs who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT continue to employ research-based ENL strategies in the classroom. Additionally, the ESL Teacher periodically meets with the former ELLs and teachers of former ELLs to informally monitor progress, assess needs, and offer academic and linguistic support and intervention as needed. 9  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. PS 25 offers a range of intervention services in ELA and Math. Classroom teachers support ELLs and SWD students in need of academic support during RTI/AIS, after school programs for literacy and math. All of these services are provided to ELLs/SWD and are offered in English and Spanish depending on student proficiency levels. Additionally, all students at PS 25 are seen by instructional specialists based on their area of need. Parent support workshops are also offered periodically, at which interpretation and translation services are available to ensure that parents receive all oral and written information in their language of choice. All ELLs in need of intervention may participate in any or all of these available services. Newcomers, Ell's and SWD ELLs will be recommended based upon individual needs. All ELLs and former ELLs may participate in all before-and after-school programs and supplemental services, as well as in "ASPIRA" an after school enrichment program and Saturday Literacy STEM program. All school bulletins, calendars, notices and permission forms, including those that pertain to school programs, are distributed in English as well as in the native language of our ELL families; this ensures that equal access to all school programs is afforded to our ELL population and that their full participation in such school programs is encouraged and supported by all school staff and home. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Inquiry learning clubs will be offered to all Ell students in cycles. Specialty teachers will create units that cover many different topics of interest, yet are based on all content areas. A hands on approach to learning will be used; while still addressing the four modalities, speaking, listening, reading and writing. Technology will play a big role in these clubs as we now have a school wide grant from "APPLE" We are planning to integrate STEM Education and Teach our ENL students coding and programming using the Sphere robotic program. Exposure to new technology will be available to further develop their technology language and knowledge on the field of computer science. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Dual Language Program was discontinued based on the fact that over the last couple of years our ELL population has become very transient. We could sustain the number of students needed in one language to implement a DL program effectively. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs and former ELLs may participate in all before and after school programs and supplemental services which include; RtI, "ASPIRA" after school enrichment program and Saturday STEM Academy with Parents. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Materials in the students' native languages such as bilingual books, dictionaries, content area glossaries, and Leveled Libraries are utilized in the ENL classroom. Students also have access to a variety of online resources in the native languages of our students. Such online resources include Tumblebook Online Read Aloud Books in Spanish (http://www.tumblebooks.com), International Children’s Digital Library with texts available in 50 languages ( http://en.childrenslibrary.org/index.shtml), and world language dictionary websites such as WordReference.com (http://www.wordreference.com) and Merriam Webster Online (http://www.merriam-webster.com). These resources are integrated into the ESL program in order to provide the 25% of mandated Native Language support. We also have IReady accounts for our TBE /SWD students; IReady, is a reading program that assesses for student levels, tracks and monitors progress and provides teachers with data specific to individual learning needs of all their students for reading. Students are able to monitor their own progress as they complete reading passages based on their level. They are not allowed to move on until they successfully complete each level. This program can be used out of school and teachers can monitor the amount of 0  time students enter to use the program at home. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? This school year, we will be using Calle De La Lectura as our Spanish Language Arts curriculum for grades K-5. In addition, we have Spanish classroom libraries that support our SLA curriculum, dictionaries and content area glossaries. ELL support in the native language is also provided through the use of other materials such as Lakeshore Photo Card Libraries with captions in English and 14 other languages and access to a wide range of online resources in the native language of our students. Such online resources include Tumblebook Online Read Aloud Books in Spanish; (http://www.tumblebooks.com), International Children’s Digital Library with texts available in 50 langauges (http://en.childrenslibrary.org/index.shtml), and world language dictionary websites such as WordReference.com 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Teachers who provide academic intervention services to ELLs consult with classroom teachers and the ESL teacher to ensure that all services and resources are appropriate for each student's individual age, grade level, ability, and linguistic learning needs. When appropriate, instruction is differentiated and resources are modified to meet the needs of all learners. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building with another school. However, materials in the students' native languages such as bilingual books, dictionaries, content area glossaries, and Leveled Libraries are utilized in the ENL classroom. Students also have access to a variety of online resources in the native languages of our students. Such online resources include Tumble book Online Read Aloud Books in Spanish (http://www.tumblebooks.com), International Children’s Digital Library with texts available in 50 languages ( http://en.childrenslibrary.org/index.shtml), and world language dictionary websites such as Word reference.com (http://www.wordreference.com) and Merriam Webster Online (http://www.merriam-webster.com). These resources are integrated into the ESL program in order to provide the 25% of mandated Native Language support. We also have IReady accounts for our TBE /SWD students; IReady, is a reading program that assesses for student levels, tracks and monitors progress and provides teachers with data specific to individual learning needs of all their students for reading. Students are able to monitor their own progress as they complete reading passages based on their level. They are not allowed to move on until they successfully complete each level. This program can be use out of school and teachers can monitor the amount of time students enter to use the program at home. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the event that the school is aware of an incoming ELL student prior to the beginning of the school year, opportunities such as parents workshops, school tours, program review, and access to supplemental materials appropriate for the child are made available to families. Oral and written information is always available in the parent's native language as well as English. The same support are offered to any new Ell entering throughout the school year. We also have a Web page that provides information on homework policies, after school programs. as well as samples of student work posted by our teachers. Involved in the are the school Guidance Counselor, the Parent Coordinator,ESL Coordinator , and the ENL teacher. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable 18. For schools with dual language programs: 1  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NOT APPLICABLE: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our Ell teachers will be thoughtfully engaged in learning cycles where they will share impactful practices that support instruction. Areas of focus will be, designing coherent instruction for Ell's using assessment data to support instruction, planning for small differentiated groups, as well as using the environment as a learning tool (footprints of learning). This cyclical learning shows improvement in student achievement and teacher practice. On-site professional Learning is also provided by our "Generation Ready" consultant who engages teachers in LAB sites, provides instructional support through lesson planning, looking at common core standards in order to support instruction, modeling and demo lessons. Teachers are allotted time to meet with her for feedback and any other professional/instructional needs they might have. We firmly believe that all children can learn regardless of place of origin and language, we also believe that they can meet or exceed standards. Always keeping that vision in mind, our language acquisition programs will provide efficient, effective, rigorous, and comprehensive pedagogical structure and processes that will ensure that all Ell students develop the interpersonal communication skills and cognitive academic language necessary to succeed. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Ensuring academic rigor in our students who are moving onto to middle school is done through exploratory hands on learning. Teachers and students are motivated to work with media. Students demonstrate measurable exit product development, demonstrations and exhibits. Teachers learn to give feedback based on project specific rubric at the beginning, middle and end of projects. Students and teachers demonstrate technical/digital proficiency students for research purposes and teachers for classroom instruction. Professional development provided is tiered and tailored to individual groups of TBE/Ell teachers; these tiered sessions will guide educators through a continuous lifelong learning process. Professional Learning is based on teacher surveys that identify targeted areas and specific learning goals. Professional Learning sessions will effectively support and impact our Ell population and TBE programs. Data is reviewed in collaborative teams and used to identify individual student needs.Units of study and quick writes and unit assessments are created, modified and translated for beginning and entering Ell's. Teachers are supported with lesson planning and preparation of instruction that is targeted to learning modalities. Small groups are created based on assessment in order to support differentiated instruction. Small group instruction, and conferring with students allows teachers to continuously revise, refine and modify instruction and practices. This year we are implementing a school wide initiative that involves a coherent and cohesive way of recording conferences with students. Teachers are given common planning time where they collaborate and analyze student work from Ell interim/periodic assessments and other assessments throughout the year; this practice in turn enables us to track/monitor progress for our Ell population, in order to set specific-strategic individual/group learning goals. Our UFT Teacher Center Instructional Specialist/ ESL Coordinator further develops our Ell/ENL teachers, using resources geared to ESL methodologies, and strategies to 2  strengthen comprehension. She strives and urges teachers to create rigorous learning environments that focus on academic achievement, language and social development through the use of research based instructional methods in reading, writing, speaking and listening and cultural awareness. The ESL teacher, provides annual professional development to all personnel providing instruction and other support services to Ell's in order to enhance their appreciation for students' native languages, cultures and their ability to provide appropriate instruction and support services. She ensures that our staff understands the provisions based on CR Part 154, which include time requirements based on levels (Beginners, Entering, Transitioning, Expanding and Comnmanding). Teachers understand that ESL is a required subject matter and not a support service. To further enhance the growth of Ells in literacy, our teachers follow a monthly calendar clearly guiding the student’s focus in reading and writing, this is complemented by our “Skill in Focus” guide that provides the weekly skill to develop learning of literacy process skills and strategies. The focus areas include main idea, identifying details, comparing and contrasting, brainstorming, scaffolding, previewing, predicting outcomes, characterization, author’s purpose,context clues, multiple meaning words and summarizing. The “Skill in Focus” is not only implemented by classroom teachers, it is also reinforced and used by push in teachers who offer support during RTI frozen time, using comprehension strategies and specific process skills. This model is also used during after school time, where students are given the opportunity to engage in oral discourse through read-aloud that support authentic accountable book talk which enhance oral language and listening development. During the after school program class room teachers work on small group strategy lessons or guided reading groups to target specific skills and work on comprehension. Students are walked through and taught to use the writing process to produce standard bearing unit pieces as they follow the steps within the writing process. They learn to develop as writers, use rubrics to support their work and most of all they learn to write for many different purposes using a variety of genres. In addition, we also provide the following literacy-based enrichment professional development in the following areas Professional Development Schoolwide initiatives: •Literature Circles/Book Club: for students on the "Expanding and Commanding" proficiency level •Technology "APPLE GRANT" all teachers Ell and TBE (schoolwide) -Media (using it as a resource to support student learning and instruction) RTI, Ells and TBE -Writing in different genres (Ell's) and TBE as well as monolingual students •"STEM"Science: TBE, Ells, monolingual -Math integrating all coMaking content comprehensible strategies content areas Professional Development Schedule: 15% total hours Ell-specific Prof. Learning all teachers 50% total hours Ell-specific Prof. Learning TBE teachers and ENL/ESL teachers October: Distinguishing language aquisition from learning disabilities (all teachers) November: Supporting Ells' achievement: oral Language Unpacked (TBE, ENL and ESL teachers) December: Incorporating ESL strategies into classroom instruction (all teachers) January: Scaffolding and text Complexity (all teachers) February: Vocabulary Unpacked and Academic Language )all teachers) March: Strategies fo preparing Ells' for State exams: ELA, STM, NYSESLAT (TBE, ENL and ESL teachers) April: Making content comprehensible strategies: listening, speaking, reading and writing (all teachers) May: Language objectives supported by lesson delivery (TBE,ENL and ESL teachers) June: Strategies for assisting ELLs in maintaining progress throughout the summer break (Parents of ELLs will also be encouraged to attend this session) (TBE,ENL and ESL teachers) Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 3  The parents of Ells' are informed through school calendars where the units of study for the month are shared in English and Spanish. Progress reports are given to parents three time a year. Teachers are available to meet with parents during Tuesday teacher parent conferences from 2:45-3:25, during these parent conferences the teachers are able to tell parents of specific learning goals for language development. The ESL teacher who speaks Spanish is available to answer any questions parents might have regarding their child's proficiency level and the progress they are making. Teachers are able to share student work at this time and decide along with the parent how support can be given at home. Assessment data results are shared with parents during these sessions. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Ell parents are active participants in many of the offered work-sessions and activities used to promote parent involvement at PS 25. We offer an adult ESOL class to our parents, which is called Family English. The goal is to improve literacy and language skills for students and their families. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Carmen Toledo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Bilingual School School DBN: 07X025 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Carmen Toledo Title Principal Yliucha Jaquez Assistant Principal Dorothy Gutierrez Parent Coordinator Jackie Garcia ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A Erly Pena Parent Teacher/Subject Area Sandra Rivera Teacher/Subject Area Mario Varuzza N/A N/A N/A N/A Therese Ebblewhite N/A N/A Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other Consultant Gen Ready Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 N/A 6/21/18 6/21/18 6/21/18 N/A N/A N/A N/A 6/21/18 N/A N/A 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X025 School Name: Bilingual School Superintendent: Elisa Alvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Dorothy Guitierrez Parent Coordinator N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A N/A N/A * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, all parents are given the Home Language Identification Survey. The parent may select to complete the form in either English or their native language. An ESL teacher and Parent Coordinator are present to explain purpose of the HLIS to the parent. If necessary, school staff fluent in the parent's native language are available to assist in interpretation, or the DOE Over-the-Phone Interpretation Service may be utilized. In Section 3 of the HLIS, the parent indicates the language(s) that s/he would like to communicate both orally and in writing with school 7  staff. The ESL teacher uses data obtained from Section 3 of the HLIS in order to pre-assess which language(s) will be needed for the current school year. The ESL teacher then updates the record of parent language preferences, which is maintained and continually updated by the ESL teacher throughout the school year. Primary language information is shared with the administration, Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team, and Pupil Accounting secretary. Classroom teachers of students whose parents have selected to communicate in another language are notified. The ESL teacher is responsible for providing translated school notices and forms, as well as arranging for any interpretation services that may be required at, face-to-face meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences and IEP meetings. At registration, parents are given the HLIS in the parent's language of choice.The ESL teacher is present to explain the HLISt o the parent. The ESL teacher conducts an informal oral interview with the child in English or the home language to identify those students who may be eligible for NYSITELL testing. Staff who are fluent in the family's native language are also present to conduct an informal linterview with the parent in their native language. If necessary, the school will utilize the DOE Over-the-Phone Interpretation services to facilitate this process. The parent then completes the HLIS form. Through this process, the ESL teacher is able to identify those children who are eligible for NYSITELL testing. Next, the ESL teacher individually administers the NYSITELL to students who are eligible for NYSITELL testing within the first ten days of enrollment. Students who are Spanish dominant and do not score proficient on the english NYSITELL are then administered the Spanish LAB-R within the first ten days of enrollment. In the event that the ESL teacher is unavailable to conduct the initial screening, administer the HLIS, and/or administer the NYSITELL and/or Spanish LAB-R, a trained pedagogue such as the Assistant Principal may complete the ELL identification process described above within the first ten days of enrollment. During this time the emergnecy contact card is given to parents, a staff member helps parents complete the card, lunch forms and surveys in their preferred native language during the registration process. The ESL teacher and the Pupil Account secretary are responsible for securing all documents related to placement Ell students. PS 25 also informs parents of the schools academic expectations, school-wide goals for all content areas, as well as the units of study that are done monthly for math and literacy, assessments specifically the NYSESLAT and ways they can support their child during the school year. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English English Spanish Arabic French Spanish Arabic French 50% English English 50% English 50% Spanish Spanish 50% Spanish N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None 8  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The documents translated or updated every year are: 1. Parent Handbook- Reviewed for any new initiatives City. State or Schoolwide 2. Progress reports are updated and translated 3. IEP documents that must be given and explained to parents in their native language 4. Communications from teachers to parents are translatedn (trip information, letters) 5. Parent/teacher announcements are translated into spanish or any other tranlslations 6. Parent volunteers provide translations of all Parent Association meetings. Most materials provided at workshops is translated into Spanish. 7. ASPIRA after school tutoring program sends notifications in spansih and has personnel available to parents 8. Parents are informed of NYS testing dates in language of their choice 9. Communication for inhouse after school Literacy and Math program are sent in native language 10. Saturday Academy notifications is posted in English and Spanish. Letters sent home in both languages. 11. A general overview of curriculum is provided to parents in their native language of choic12. The pricipal sends letters home informing parents of schoolwide initiatives as well as the expectations. N/A N/A N/A September 2018- June 2019 We plan for translation services by recruiting in house staff to translate for meetings and/or documents. If necessary, we out source for translation services. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 9  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parents are now invited four times a year to meet fromally with their child's teacher (September/curriculum night, November/parent-teacher, March/parent-teacher, and May/parent-teacher). Teachers are now to available to parents every Tuesday from 2:45-3:25; during these meetings teachers address learning goals, expectations, data, behavior/homework and other areas. The teachers also provide work-sessions that provide parents with support on how to help students at home,. these sessions are based on targeted needs found throughout all grades. The guidance counselors reach out to parents via phone call or home visits if necessary. They make appointments to meet one on one with parents as much as possible. September 2018- June 2019 interpretation service(s)? At the beginning of the school year a survey is provided to assess and identify the amount of parents who are in need of translation services. The survey's collected were reviewed and showed that approximately 90% of our parents need oral interpretations and written translations in Spanish. The montly school newsletter-calendar provides parents with educational information, after school program schedules and school-wide special events. Parents are satisfied with the written translations/interpretations provided for them. During faculty conferences our staff is reminded that all information or notices to parents must be translated into both English and Spanish. Staff is reminded that all notices must be apporved by the Principal. Support is provided to those teachers who are not Spanish dominant. The ESL teacher maintains, revises and updates records of parent selected languages. This information is continously shared with the administration, Parent Coordinator, School Leadership Team, and Pupil Accounting secretary. Classroom teachers of students whose parents have selected to communicate in another language are notified and supported. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, we have people on staff to translate information to our limited English proficient families. 0  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We provide training to all our staff on policies and procedures as per the Chancellor's regulations. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services, each parent/guardian who is in need of language assistance will receive a copy of the DOE's Bill of Parent's Rights and Responsibilities in the primary language, including information regarding the parental right to translation and interpretation services. Signs indicating the availability of translation and interpretation services will be prominently displayed in the Main Office. In addition, the school's safety plan will include procedures for ensuring that parents will not be prevented from communicating with school staff solely due to a language barrier.Most of the non-English speaking parents, speak Spanish. The Bilingual Parent Coordinator and other staff members in the school such as the School Principal and the Assistant Principal are also bilingual and are able to speak in Spanish and provide translations when necessary. Written translations of documents to be sent home or posted are prepared by a certified bilingual teacher. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school uses DOE parents surveys as well as surveys provided in house to meet the needs of parents. The Parent Coordinator will assist parents with the surveys they must complte for the DOE. The ESL teacher collects the surveys given out by the school in order to target work-sessions for parents. 1 
