 12X057 School Name: P.S. 057 CRESCENT Principal: MARY BLANDINO-SANCHEZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 12X057 PS 57 Crescent 321200010057 Pre-K – 5 th grade 2111 Crotona Avenue Bronx NY, 10457 718-367-9446 Phone Number: 718-561-7972 Fax: Rosemary Rodriguez RRodriguez63@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Mary Blandino-Sanchez MerylVolpe Elizabeth Maldonado Christopher Matthews SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Diane Arias N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road. Bronx, NY 10460 jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-328-2310 Phone Number: 718-542-7736 Fax:   FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: ( 718)-828-7776 / (718)-741-8895 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Mary Blandino-Sanchez MerylVolpe Elizabeth Maldonado Diane Arias N/A N/A N/A Elisa Hurley Katie Lanser Dianne Giuliano Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Elected UFT Member Member/ Elected UFT Member Member/ Elected UFT Member   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Chloe Rodriguez Wendy Marin Roberta Yeboah Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Elected Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? P.S. 57 The Crescent School is dedicated to the intellectual, social and personal growth of all scholars, providing a safe, positive and challenging learning environment so that they may reach their highest potential. By consistently reflecting upon and adjusting research based instruction, we strive to meet the needs of all scholars so that they are fully prepared to excel in all of their college and career goals. An active partnership between staff, scholars, parents and the community will be cultivated to ensure that our scholars are immersed in the highest quality education.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 57 The Crescent School is a vibrant, safe and nurturing community that fosters and values respect for all. Our primary goal is to provide an outstanding education for each and every scholar who walks through our doors. Every scholar must be challenged to work to his/her greatest potential. Each scholar will be regarded as a separate and important individual and will be given varieties of valuable learning experiences as well as an environment that will allow them to grow at their own rate and individual way. Education is a science of teaching and learning and professional development will be a key lever for our teachers to continuously enhance their practice in order to provide exemplary differentiated instruction and to develop our STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) based curricula. An active partnership between scholars, parents, community and staff will be cultivated to ensure that all voices are heard and honored. Through partnerships with the Bronx Zoo, Marquis Studios, Learning Through An Expanded Arts Program (LEAP) The New Victory Theatre, New York Cares, the New York Botanical Garden, students are exposed to a variety of experiences at cultural institutions throughout New York City that support the curriculum. PS 57 continues to grow partnerships each year in order to maintain a balance between academia and arts enrichment. The school currently services students in general education, inclusion, and self-contained settings with disabilities that range from learning-disabled to autistic. A lot of time and attention is given to this population of children and many of the teachers, paraprofessionals and school aides have been trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in order to support the ever-growing needs of the subgroup. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. PS 57 Crescent is an elementary school with 514 students from pre-kindergarten through grade 5. The school population comprises 24% Black, 70% Hispanic, 1% White, and 1% Asian students. The student body includes 15% English language learners and 25% special education students. Boys account for 49% of the students enrolled and girls account for 51%. The average attendance rate for the 2016-2017 school year was approximately 90%. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Strong family-community ties was an element of the framework that our school community made the most progress. Working closely with the Parent Coordinator and members of the Parent Association, the level of parent involvement and support to the school has increased significantly as a result of increased opportunities for parents to become involved, such as monthly Principal Coffee Talk events, Family Paint Nights, Educational Workshops and Arts Program Volunteerism. Coupled with strong family-community ties, our school has continued to create a supportive environment where students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers and peers. The key areas of focus for the upcoming school year are the following: Pedagogy- Ensure that there is cohesion across classrooms in the delivery of lessons and optimal student engagement; 0  Assessment- Ensure that teachers carefully analyze student data to consistently monitor student progress and modify instruction to meet the needs of all students. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X057 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 509 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 46 23 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 15 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 86.6% % Reduced Lunch 15.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.7% 71.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.16 3% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 77% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 77 74 88.5% 0.2% 22.4% 22.0% 0.6% 4.7% 4 10% 6.2 23.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our professional development plan for 2017-2018 centered on refining teacher practice by focusing on conducting one to one student conferences so that teachers can efficaciously address student areas of growth and provide specific and actionable feedback to students so that they may take a firmer ownership of their learning. As a result, we have seen an increase in the use of student data to determine strengths and next steps in order for teachers to conduct small group lessons that target specific skills and strategies aligned to student needs. However, a problem of practice that we have identified and has been confirmed by this year's Principal Performance Observations is the inconsistency of the use of inquiry protocols to identify problems of practice, the creation of specific action plans to address those problems and the modifications to instruction to ensure student understanding and mastery of presented concepts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, all teachers will be participating in grade level inquiry work to identify specific problems of practice and create and implement appropriate action plans to modify literacy instruction as evidenced by an increase of at least three Fountas & Pinnell reading levels by 90% of students and/or an increase of 5% of all students meeting proficiency levels in the New York State English Language Assessment. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will utilize the Danielson Framework for Teaching to support rigorous instruction Within the four domains, PS 57—in alignment with the Chancellor’s initiatives—has elected to focus on the intentional grouping of students to effectively address their specific needs, including English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The Framework provides teachers and administrators with a common language around instructional practices and with a common set of lenses through which to view improvements in instructional practice. The continued strengthening of instructional practice will lead to a steady rise in student achievement for all constituents. A significant number of our school-based professional learning sessions will focus on the utilization of specific inquiry protocols, particularly on the analysis of student work in order to identify and target problems of practice, the creation and implementation of action plans to modify instruction. A schedule will be developed for teachers to conduct inquiry within their common planning meetings where they will follow specific inquiry protocols to identify and address grade trends based on the analysis of student work. Teachers, support staff, administrators. Teachers College Staff Developers will provide targeted professional development in the development of research based pedagogical strategies designed to address specific student needs identified through the analysis of student work. PS 57 teachers, support staff, students, administrators. PS 57 teachers, support staff, students and administrators. Implementation will begin September 2018 and continue through June, 2019. Administration will create and follow a schedule for teacher observations/feedback utilizing Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. PS 57 teachers, support staff, students and administrators. Implementation will begin September 2018 and Administration, instructional coaches, model teachers and teacher leaders. continue through June, 2019 Implementation will begin September 2018 and continue through June, 201. Implementation will begin in September, 2018 and continue through June, 2019. Grade Leaders will oversee most of the process with administrative support and teacher teams will rotate roles and responsibilities on a weekly basis. Administrators will oversee and supervise the implementation of strategies through classroom observations and walkthroughs. Additionally, Supervisors will 4  Our Teacher Mentor is in Year 4 of the District 12 New Teacher Center Mentoring Program which provides strategies and techniques in developing and supporting new teachers. Our instructional focus of conducting grade level inquiry sessions will be supported by the mentor in guiding new teachers, as well as grade teams on the implementation of the inquiry protocols. PS 57 first and second year teachers Implementation will begin in September, 2018 and continue through June, 2019. All Students will have individual iReady accounts for both English Language Arts and mathematics. After initial assessment, students will be able to work on targeted skills that are differentiated based on their strengths and needs. Teachers will utilize the data garnered from the iReady database to inform instruction. K-5 students, teachers, support staff Implementation will begin in September, 2018 and continue through June, 2019. develop inter-visitation schedules for teacher professional development. The teacher mentor will continuously support new teachers by viewing lessons and modeling best practices. The principal and assistant principal will oversee implementation by conducting both formal and informal observations in order to provide feedback for refinement. Administration will oversee implementation of the program and the data specialist will be charged with ensuring that teachers have continuous access to student data. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families and support their understanding of the strategies that we are implementing within our classrooms, we will be conducting workshops during Tuesday Parent Engagement sessions, presented by teachers and 5  administrators, as well as scheduling parent walk-throughs throughout the year so that they may see the steps in action. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Administration will create and follow a schedule for teacher observations/feedback utilizing Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. ● The Danielson Framework for Teaching rubric, support from Borough Support Office staff, and ADVANCE implementation team members as well as Teacher leaders and administrative support. ● Per-session funding will be utilized to provide professional development to teachers regarding observation findings, best practices and implementing feedback given by administrators. ● Galaxy funds will be utilized to support teacher improvement with the purchase of materials, instructional technology and professional development opportunities. As part of the D12 New Teacher Center Mentoring Program, approximately 40% of our teacher mentor's salary will be devoted to the pedagogical support of first and second year teachers, funded by Tax Levy Fair Student Funding and Title I Schoolwide program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators will observe grade level inquiry sessions to ensure fidelity to the inquiry protocol. Additionally, administrators will meet on a weekly basis to analyze data gathered from classroom observations. Observation data will be monitored and used to link our school wide professional development plan to these observations in order to differentiate supervision/feedback and increase teacher effectiveness. Our mid-point benchmark will take place in February of 2019, to determine whether there has been an increase in student reading levels, as measured by results of DRA assessments. Additionally, progress and implementation of the New Teacher Center Mentoring Program will be monitored by administration through weekly debriefing sessions with the teacher mentor and the submission of teacher support logs. Progress monitoring of the i-Ready program will take place monthly, with administration reviewing iReady data to ensure that students are logging on consistently. Additionally, during observation feedback conferences, administration will discuss with teachers student data reflecting the implementation and efficacy of selected action plans. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 6   Advance Observation Reports  Teacher conference notes   Professional Development agendas and sign-in sheets  Teacher Support Logs Inquiry Session Agendas and worksheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ● According to 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 89% of parents felt that the school offers a wide enough variety of courses, extracurricular activities, and services. ● According to the 2015-2016 School Quality Snapshot, 80% of teachers say that adults at the school teach students how to advocate for themselves, in comparison to 83% citywide. According to the Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS), 32% of all occurrences were Level 3 infractions, engaging in shoving, pushing, or engaging in a minor altercation or similar physical confrontational behavior towards students or school personnel. ● According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 75% of teachers feel that adults at the school recognize disruptive behavior as social-emotional learning opportunities a 9% increase from the 2015 School Quality Snapshot, but still 5% below the city average. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, P.S. 57 will expand the implementation of Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS), incorporating "Restorative Practices" by conducting weekly community conferences dedicated to conflict resolution that will result in a 5% reduction in Level 3-5 incidents reflected on the OORS reports by June, 2019. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? We will introduce and implement community conferences for students that will include opportunities for students to discuss and resolve conflicts in a socially responsible manner. Students, teachers, parents September, 2018 to June, 2019 Our guidance counselor and PBIS Coach will collaborate with teachers, SBST staff and parent coordinator to identify students who need more intensive socio-emotional support so as to provide additional counseling, behavior modification techniques and strategies to more fully address student needs. They will develop individualized action plans that will be communicated to all constituents, including parents and support staff. We will continue the work begun last year with Restorative Practices, a check-in-check-out system for our students most in need of behavior intervention. This system consists of students daily checking in with an adult at the start of school to retrieve a goal sheet and encouragement, teachers providing feedback on the sheet throughout the day and students checking out at the end of the day with an adult, and having parents sign off each night. Students and Parents September, 2018 to June, 2019 Students, teachers, all support staff, parents September, 2018 to November, 2019; as well as throughout the year, as needed. Established goals will be aligned with Instructional Educational Plans for our students with disabilities. Additionally, English Language Learners will be paired with staff that is proficient in their home languages, when possible, as well as ENL teachers. Students, teachers, all support staff, parents September, 2018 to November, 2019 Goals will be established and monitored during monthly SIT/PPT meetings to determine efficacy as well as to revise goals as students progress, as prescribed by the School Behavior Support Plan. Students, teachers, support staff, parents October, 2018 to June, 2019 Administrators, PBIS Coach, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, teachers and support staff Administrators, Parent Coordinator, PBIS Coach, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, secretaries, SBST staff and teachers. Administrators, Parent Coordinator, PBIS Coach, Guidance Counselor, teachers, SBST staff, all support staff. Administrators and PBIS Coach will oversee the initiative and it will be implemented by administration, PBIS Coach, Guidance Counselors, teachers, SBST and support staff. Administration, PBIS Coach, guidance counselor, school psychologist, social worker, teachers 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of the Community Conferences Component at the beginning of the school year and be asked to sign a contract, along with their students. Letters will be sent home to the parents of participating students so that they can be apprised of the outcomes and agreements garnered within these conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Identified staff members will receive ongoing professional development in restorative practices and assembly periods will be utilized to reinforce themes and promote program, PBIS training workshops, Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Services (TCIS) training. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Instructional dean and guidance counselor will progress monitor the frequency of student conflicts as well as monitor the resolution of individual incidents. During our monthly PPT/SIT/PBIS meetings, we will discuss identified students and determine program effectiveness. In February, 2019, we will review OOR's reports with the expectation of seeing a 5% decrease in incidents compared to February, 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will assess progress through the examination of the number of SWIS forms that are generated on a monthly basis as well as Online Occurrence Reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 95% of teachers say that they work together to design instructional programs, in comparison to 93% citywide. Additionally, 91% of teachers stated that they had the resources to include opportunities for developing students' conceptual, procedural and applied skills in math. However, 73% of teachers responded that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school.  The priority need that will be addressed is for teachers to work collaboratively to refine math curricula, utilizing the resources provided to them. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, all teachers will engage in collaborative teams that will focus on adjusting and refining the math units of study to ensure alignment of skills and strategies as well as addressing student strengths and next steps, as evidenced by a 5% increase of students meeting proficiency levels in the New York State Mathematics Assessment. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Analysis of individual math units to adjust and refine so as to best meet the needs of our students Teachers/Students October, 2018 - June, 2019 (Monthly) Teachers,instructional coach, administration, Generation Ready Consultant A significant number of our school-based professional learning sessions will focus on the refinement of math curricula. Our Generation Ready Math Consultant will meet with grade teams on a monthly basis to adjust upcoming units and lessons as well as focus in on specific pedagogical strategies in support of those adjustments. Teachers Teachers Student performance data will be an integral component of teacher feedback sessions conducted by supervisors and coach/mentor. Teachers Administration Principal and assistant principals will participate in Teacher Development and Evaluation Clinics offered by District 12 in order to refine teacher feedback regarding student assessment. Assistant Principal and New Teacher Mentor will attend New Teacher Center Mentoring Program training to support new teachers in the analysis of student work for ongoing assessment ENL and Special Education Coordinators will conduct professional development sessions during common planning periods and PD Mondays to assist teachers with the scaffold of skills and strategies in order to address student needs. Parent workshops will be devoted to informing parents about grade level common core standards in mathematics as well as providing strategies to address student needs and strengths at home. Parents October, 2018- June 2019 Teachers, instructional coach, administration September, 2018- June, 2019 (Monthly) September, 2018 - June, 2019 September, 2018 - June, 2019 Teachers, instructional coach, Math Consultant, administration Administration, coach District Personnel, Administration Assistant Principal, New Teacher Mentor September, 2018 - June, 2019 Administration, New Teacher Mentor Teachers Teachers, instructional coach, ENL and Special Education Coordinators, Administration Teachers, instructional coach, administration September, 2018 - June, 2019 (Monthly) November 2018, January, March, 2019 2  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops will be devoted to informing parents about grade level common core standards in mathematics as well as providing strategies to address student needs and strengths at home. School Administration will assign teachers on a rotating basis to conduct specific workshops throughout all grades, with assistant principals overseeing the implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Common planning times will be incorporated within the weekly school schedule for all grade levels for teachers to collaboratively plan lessons and units. Administration, the instructional coach and teacher leaders will conduct professional development sessions. Grade supervisors will attend math planning sessions to ensure that the work is done efficaciously and to guide practice. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators will monitor weekly common planning sessions as well as math curricula workshops to ensure that student work is analyzed and utilized to refine units of study. Additionally, lesson plans will be reviewed during the observation process. Our mid-point benchmark will take place in February of 2018 to determine whether there has been an increase in teacher ratings for Component 1e, comparing teacher ratings between Observation Cycles 1 and 2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Unit Planning Session Agendas and sign-in sheets  Revised Unit and Lesson Plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. P.S. 57 has established a specific reading and writing curricula. However, student engagement with the content is inconsistent with teachers conducting lessons that are predominantly teacher-led. As a result, there is a need for teachers to balance their lessons so as to promote student independence and agency. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, teachers will conduct lessons that follow the workshop model, allowing for student independence, in reading and writing, as evidenced by 75% of all teachers receiving an effective or highly effective rating in Component 3c (engaging students in learning) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Ongoing professional development throughout the school year will be conducted to support teachers in the implementation of the Readers and Writers Workshop. Teachers, Administrators, support staff September, 2018- June, 2019 The principal and lead teachers will attend professional development sessions provided by Teachers' College to deepen understanding of the teaching of reading and to share with colleagues for implementation. Principal, teachers September, 2018- June, 2019 Administration, literacy coach, lead teachers, Teachers College Staff Developers Administration, lead teachers Inter-visitation schedules will be developed for grade teams to observe colleagues' practices and debrief on their noticings. Teachers, Administrators, support staff September, 2018 - June, 2019 Administration, literacy coach, lead teachers New teachers will be provided targeted support by the teacher mentor and assistant principal, trained by the New Teacher Center Mentoring Program common planning periods. First and second year teachers September, 2018 - June, 2019 Administration, literacy coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to attend class walk-throughs during the school year to observe the implementation of the Readers and Writers Workshop, with debriefing sessions to answer questions, led by school administration, lead teachers and coaches. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers College Professional Development Consultants  Teachers' College Professional Development Opportunities  Common Planning periods incorporated into school schedule   Units of Study and aligned trade books  Scheduled inter-visitations for teachers and support staff Literacy Coach 5   Grade Supervisors Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Administrators will monitor weekly common planning sessions to ensure that teachers are effectively planning reading and writing instruction. Additionally, lesson plans will be reviewed during the observation process. Our mid-point benchmark will take place in February of 2019 to determine whether there has been an increase in teacher ratings for Component 1e, comparing teacher ratings between Observation Cycles 1 and 2. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrators will monitor progress by developing an observation schedule to ensure the implementation of the reading and writing workshop. Teacher ratings in Components 1a and 1e will be compared between Observation Cycles 1 and 2 to determine whether there has been an increase. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, 93% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn. At PS 57 Crescent we believe that schools should continuously strive to create welcoming environments for families and provide concrete strategies for parents to help their students succeed. Each year we have worked closely with the PA, Parent coordinator and community based organizations to help welcome, value, and incorporate families and the larger community into the school and classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parents will have participated in workshops that provide strategies to increase student mathematics achievement, as evidenced by an increase of 10% parent attendance rates at school-led workshops. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide parent workshops that focus on skills and strategies to improve student mathematics skills. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent community of PS 57 Crescent September, 2018 to June, 2019 Parent Coordinator, Parent’s Association members, Community Based Organizations administrators, teachers/staff of PS 57. Parent Coordinator, Parent’s Association members, Community Based Organizations administrators, parent/guardian, volunteers, teachers/staff of PS 57. Parent Coordinator, SBST Staff, Guidance Counselor, Parent’s Association members, Community Based Organizations administrators, parent/guardian, volunteers, teachers/staff of PS 57. The Parent Coordinator will maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. Parent community of PS 57 Crescent September, 2018 to June, 2019 On-going conversations and counseling sessions with targeted students and parents about their behavior and progress. Calendar of events will be created and distributed to parents and translated for parents who do not speak English. Calendars will include all school wide events. Utilize the Parent engagement time built into the teacher’s schedule to communicate with parents and support them as necessary. Develop and distribute a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. Parent community of PS 57 Crescent September, 2018 to June, 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A 8  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will monitor progress towards our goals each month at our monthly administrative, SLT and Family Engagement Team meetings. In February, 2019, we will review Parent Sign-In sheets from all parent -focused events, including parent/teacher conferences, workshops and meetings to determine if there has been an increase in parent participation. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will monitor progress towards our goals each month at our monthly administrative, SLT and Family Engagement Team meetings. Additionally, in February, 2019, we will determine whether there has been a 10% increase in parent attendance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Event Sign-In Sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 1. Great Leaps (4 separate providers) 2. MaxScholar Setts at-risk 3. Wilson’s (SETSS-at risk) 4. Scholar Intervention Afterschool Program Reading 5. SPIRE intervention Program 6. READ (Afterschool Intervention program) 1. Repeated readings, comprehension 2. Computer-based 1. During the school day for 5-45 minute sessions Great Leaps is one-to-one 3. Repeated readings, phonemic awareness 2. MaxScholar Setts is done in small groups 4. Reading comprehension, writing, responses 5. Repetition, phonics and phonemic awareness 6. Repeated reading, phonemic awareness 3. Wilson’s is one-to-one 4. Kaplan (SIAP)- differentiated whole group (9 separate classes, 3 per grade for Grades 3-5) 5. SPIRE Program done in small groups 6. READ afterschool is one-to-one 1. Great Leaps- ETS periods, during the school day 2. MaxScholar Setts at-risk is done throughout the school day 3-5 periods a week. 3. Wilson’s- throughout the day in 45 minute blocks 4. Kaplan (SIAP) is afterschool, twice a week for 2 hours (2) 5. SPIRE is done three times a week for a total of 1 hour and 40 minutes. 6. READ is done 3 days a week for a total of 9 hours per week 1.iReady Afterschool, twice a week for 2 hours 2. SETSS- during the school day –45 minutes small group Mathematics 1.iReadyScholar Intervention Afterschool Program Math 2. SETSS (at risk) 1. Pencil and paper, rote memorization, problem solving 2. Memorization of facts, problem solving, computation 1. iReady)- differentiated whole group (9 separate classes, 3 per grade for grades 3-5) 2. SETSS at risk- small group instruction 0  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) SETSS (at risk) reading in content areas SETSS (at risk) reading in content areas 1. Guidance Counselor 2. Psychologist/Social Worker (at risk) 3. PBIS Coach 4. Administrators SETSS- small group instruction sessions 3-5 times a week. During the school day – 45 minute small group sessions SETSS- small group instruction During the school day – 45 minute small group sessions 1. Small groups or one-to-one 2.Small groups or one-to-one 3.Small groups or one-to-one 4.Small groups or one-to-one 1. During the school day for 40 minute sessions 2. During the school day for 10-30 minute sessions 3. During the school day for 5-45 minute sessions 4. During the school day for 5-45 minute sessions Reading comprehension, response, repeated reading, writing Reading comprehension, response, repeated reading, writing 1. Conversations, writing, drawing, role-play, crisis-intervention. 2. Conversations, writing, drawing, role-play, crisis-intervention 3. Conversations, writing, drawing, role-play, crisis-intervention 4. Conversations, writing, drawing, role-play, crisis-intervention 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 30 Students in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  Before and after school academic and enrichment programs  Assistance with uniforms  School supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. A hiring committee is established and strict guidelines are followed when hiring new personnel. We focus on our areas of need and look at license areas. Professional development is given each week at the school level and teachers/staff leave the building monthly to receive high-quality professional development from network, district and NYC support staff. All of our teachers are highly-qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We provide professional development sessions both in school and attend network-provided professional development series as well. Professional development opportunities are presented to the staff from various institutions based on observation data collected by administration and needs-assessments made by individual teachers who are reflective in their practice. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parent involvement activities, including family fun nights, Parents as Readers, class participation and workshops on best practices for early childhood students, transitioning from pre-school and attendance awareness. Kindergarten orientation. In-school transition activities between Pre-K and Kindergarten teachers and parents 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher Team meeting time is utilized to analyze student data and in turn utilize the data to make instructional adjustments to advance student achievement and also teachers are given professional development opportunities as a result of student data and teacher observation data. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 4, 5a, 5c, 5d, 5e, 6 Sections 4, 5a, 5c, 5d, 5e, 6 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 427,145.00 Title II, Part A Federal 102,045.00 5  Title III, Part A Federal 11,200.00 Title III, Immigrant Federal 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3,100,283.00 X N/A X Sections 4, 5a, 5c, 5d, 5e, 6 N/A Sections 4, 5a, 5c, 5d, 5e, 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 6  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 57 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 57’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. 8  PS 57 Crescent will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 9  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSAState accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under theEvery Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 57 [School name], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 0  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by theEvery Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 1  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video game ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials The ENL Academy: The ENL After School Program is designed to help third, fourth, and Begin description here: Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program information At PS 57 Crescent we maintain high expectations for all our ELLs. Our overriding goal is to work diligently to ensure our students are critical thinkers and self-regulated learners. Based on the ELL data, students are invited to different academies to enhance their language acquisition process and academic performance. Our Title III Funds Supplemental Program for English Language Learner Scholars consists of the following programs. · The Language Academy: The Language Academy After School Program is designed to help third, fourth, and fifth grade ELLs who have zero to four years of services and performing at the Entering and Emerging Level as determined by the 2018&nbsp;NYSITELL/ NYSESLAT Scores. The Language Academy After School Program takes place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 PM to 4:30 PM. The teaching staff for the After School Program consists of two certified ENL teachers. The Language Academy After School Program will consists of approximately for 20 sessions. The class will have approximately 10 to 12 students. This program will also assist scholars who have received little or no formal schooling in their native countries.&nbsp; We aim to effectively meet the needs of this targeted group. Growth in students will be measured by their performance on the 2019&nbsp;NYSESLAT scores and the DRA Assessment System. · fifth graders ELLs who are performing at the Transitioning and Expanding Level as determined by the 2018&nbsp;NYSITELL/NYSESLAT Scores. The ENL After School Program takes place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 PM to 4:30 PM. The teaching staff for the After School Program consists of two certified ENL teacher. The ENL After School Program will consists of approximately of 25 sessions. The class will have approximately 15 students. This Program is designed to move students in the continuum of language proficiency levels and to improve their academic skills. Furthermore, the ENL teacher will provide quality instruction to our ELLs with a focus on the four modalities of language acquisition: listening, speaking, reading, and writing. In order to make content comprehensible, the teacher will use scaffolding strategies to facilitate student learning. Growth in students will be measured by their performance on the 2019&nbsp;NYSESLAT scores and the DRA Assessment System. · first and second graders ELLs to move in the continuum of language proficiency levels and to improve their academic and social skills. The ENL Saturday Academy takes place on Saturdays from 8:30 AM to 11:30 AM. The teaching staff for the ENL Saturday Academy will consist&nbsp;of one certified ENL teacher.&nbsp; The Saturday Program will consist of approximately of 16 sessions.&nbsp; The class will have approximately 15 students. Furthermore, the program will promote learning through play.&nbsp; Games with flashcards, competitions, races, and so on, are among the most exciting ways in which children learn. &nbsp;As well as encouraging active learning, they develop social skills. Growth in students will be measured by their performance on the 2019&nbsp;NYSESLAT scores and the DRA Assessment System. The ENL Saturday Academy: The ENL Saturday Academy Program is designed to help 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Schedule and duration: The Language Academy: September 26, 2018 to December 20, 2018 Wednesdays and Thursdays Hours: 2:30 pm – 4:30 pm The ENL Academy: January 02, 2019 to April 4, 2019 Wednesdays and Thursdays Hours: 2:30 pm – 4:30 pm The ENL Saturday Academy: May 04th, 2019 to June 22th, 2019 Saturdays Hours: 8:30 am- 11:30 am Language of Instruction: English will be the language of instruction with native language supports as needed and available. Number and types of certified teachers: 2 certified ENL Teacher Types of materials: · · · · · · · English Now Intervention A/B iReady Program NYSESLAT Preparation Books Phonics Skills Books Reading/Writing materials Content Area-related materials Teacher made materials rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Part C: Professional Development Professional Development sessions will be carried out over the course of the school year. Staff members (General Education and Special Education Classroom Teachers, Content Area Teachers, Guidance Staff, Administrators, Paraprofessionals, and SBS Team members) will have the opportunity to participate in the training. Training will be provided on Second Language Acquisition and strategies such as scaffolding, instructional strategies, academic language to support content area participation. “Teacher-talk” repertoire awareness, meta-linguistic skills, such as sound-t-symbol correspondence, linguistic functions within the context of a lesson, accountable- talk stems, best practices for English Language Learners and differentiated instruction. 6  Part C: Professional Development Teachers to receive training: All teachers and school building members, including staff who may not hold mandated ESL Jose P. Training. Schedule and Duration: November 6, 2018 Citywide Professional Development Days (1-2) hours Stages of Second Language Development (Provider: V. Zapata) Ell Subgroup (Provider: L. Sachs) November 19, 2018 Understanding Amended CR Part 154 (Provider: V. Zapata) Vocabulary Road to Reading Comprehension (Provider: L. Sachs) December 3, 2018 Fostering relationships with parents and parent engagement (Provider: R. Rodriguez) March 4, 2019 Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs (Presenters: V. Zapata, L. Sachs) June 6, 2019 Citywide Professional Development Days (1-2) hours Understanding ELL Teaching models and best practices (Providers: V. Zapata, L. Sachs) **Additionally all Monday PD’s will include “ENL Considerations” on the agenda for all content topics. Professional Development Offerings/Sessions for NYCDOE employees These sessions vary in topics and presenters. Teachers are permitted to leave the building on case by case and by means of level of interest and subject area relevance. (Providers: Office of English Language Learners Specialists & District-Led PD's (To be announced) rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The goal at PS57 Crescent is to increase parental engagement and the overall climate of parental representation at the school as well as improve the level of academic and social language understood by the parents. We want to help develop multicultural awareness and appreciation by 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities assisting our parents in understanding the academic content and student achievement standards that all scholars are expected to meet and provide supports for parents themselves to increase understanding of American culture, the English language and internalize academic and social vocabulary. Moreover, our parent coordinator, Ms. Rodriguez meets and communicates with the parents on a daily basis. Every morning, Ms. Rodriguez makes herself available to answer parents’ questions and concerns regarding any issue about their children’s education. If Ms. Rodriguez is unable to address the parents’ concerns, she directs the parents to an administrator and/or teachers who can assist the parents. Schedule and Duration: •October 2018-June, 2019 Topics to be covered: •ESL classes for Parents of PS 57 ELLs (Dates: Tuesdays from 2:30pm-3:30pm beginning January 2019-April 2019) Presenter: TBD •Multicultural Day: April 17, 2019 •We will also be introducing Parent Engagement Workshops for parents of ELLs beginning in January, 2019. This will be facilitated by our ELL teachers and a bilingual teacher Tuesday afternoon during the Parent Engagement time implemented by the city. This will be hands-on and needs-based. Session Themes: •Parent Session (Explaining Community-based Resources that benefit Parents of ELLs (January 16, 2019) •Math Game(s) Session (Based on Go-Math Units of Study (January 22, 2019) •NYSESLAT Informative Session Parents of ELLs (March 26, 2019) Sessions will be conducted by in-housed (PS 57X) licensed ENL and Bilingual pedagogues. How parents will be notified of these activities: •Monthly Parent Calendar •Staff will inform parents of on-going activities (ENL Coordinator, building pedagogues, paraprofessionals, office staff, our Bilingual Parent Coordinator, and Administrative Directors) •Translated forms, letters, or invites will be provided to caregivers. •PS 57 Crescent Website •Automated School Messenger will be utilized in accordance to the parent's preferred language of contact. •Translated posters will be posted in common areas of the school building (outside entrance doors, hallways, dismissal areas, etc.) •Announcements, alerts, reminders will be made to scholars or visiting parents via the school’s intercom system •Classroom staff will make announcements and reminders to scholars 8 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name The Crescent School Borough Bronx School Number 057 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mary Blandino-Sanchez Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Vivian Zapata, ENL Coordinator Teacher/Subject Area Laurence E. Sachs, ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Heather Stanziani, ENL Teacher Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Jennell Tirado, Special Ed/ELL Coach School Counselor Lilawattie Pooran Parent Diane Arias Parent Coordinator Rosemary Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 3 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 0  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 544 Total number of ELLs 95 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.46% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NA Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PS 57 makes use of various assessment tools to evaluate ELL literacy skills. Teachers generate multiple source assessment records for each ELL using formal and informal data, including work samples. They include: On Demand Writing (K-5), Running Records (December & March),DRA (Fall & Spring), I-Ready. In addition, the NYSITELL, Spanish LAB, and NYSESLAT results are also utilized to specifically assess ELLs; in fact, they present a broad view of students' performance in the four spectrums of Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking. Analysis and review tools turn a vast amount of data into valuable, easily consumable information. Data offers snapshots of individual ELLs' performance, allowing teachers to track select data elements over time to make meaningful scholar goals and objectives. The data elements are used as a strategic framework defining the characteristics of effective educational plans and cover a broad range of CCLS and rigorous school interests including assessments, student supports, supplementary services, financial expenditures, and ways of closing the achievement 1  gap Data reveals scholars struggle with print awareness, decoding, phonemics awareness, summarizing, grasping details, paraphrasing, drawing conclusions, inferencing, and understanding organizational structures of writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In order to support this effort, all teachers with ELLs in their classes, as well as ENL providers, use the RLAT report and review all NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results at the beginning of the academic year to determine needs and plan for instruction. The EDAT tool has been introduced to selected teachers and will become part of our data analysis system. The ENL teachers work in collaboration and common planning with teachers who have ELL students to help tailor their daily lessons. In addition, our range of assessment programs helps us to determine specifically, our students’ areas of need and strength. Therefore, we don’t use the assessments in isolation, but compare/contrast and integrate the results of the different assessment programs to help give us a clearer picture of where the students are exactly, in terms of literacy skills and English language development. The results of the data help inform our instructional plan and prescribes the need for a strong content area instructional component in English, and an English language development component. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Public School 57 takes into account test scores, Student Data Promotion Portfolios assessments and the ELLs’ development in the second language to determine program trends, successes, and program modifications. Individual ELL needs are addressed if gains are not being progressively made. Various aforementioned interventions are put in to effect in order to increase scholar success. ELLs who make unsatisfactory gains are discussed at the Scholar Study Team (PLT) meetings and may be observed by our school social worker, Pedro Reyes, psychologist, Alan Vicioso a SETTS teacher, a speech teacher or other appropriate support team members. The team utilizes student data to drive meetings , discussions, students benchmark, goal setting, and performance within CCLS. Teachers, administration, and parental feedback are considered when examining the success or in-need programmatic change of the individual scholar. In between cycles of instruction we evaluate data from: •Use NYSITELL/NYSESLAT formatted materials •Consider informal data “kid watching” •Scantron Performance Series •Wesler Cognitive Test Our evaluations are transparent and calculated in an understandable manner to accurately assess overall performance and identify opportunities for student performance improvement. The information is gathered to show students’ progress and or needs and helps in substantiating the effectiveness of programs in place for ELLs and how and where additional support is needed. We ensure that we: Give practitioners feedback on where they are in relation to that standard • Provide the availability of methodologies • Examine the development and strengths of the process and the outcomes of student work (Professional Learning Team) • Teachers have a voice in ensuring an evaluation that accurately ties to student goals and objectives. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? PS 57 uses data in a strategic way to instructionally support English Language Learners. The school engages in progressive data collection throughout the year using assessments aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. In the area of English Language Arts, PS 57 uses the Developmental Reading Assessment, DRA, and the I-Ready Reading Assessment to assess literacy skills of students in grades K-5. The school uses these programs to track student progress in the reading areas of: phonemic awareness, decoding, accuracy, fluency, and comprehension. If students are not performing at or above grade level during any time of the standard reading assessment periods, they are additionally assessed to further identify, track, and remediate deficiencies in reading. Parents are contacted to discuss need and how student can best be supported at home. If student continues to struggle, then conversation takes place with grade Assistant Principal for further conversation with 2  teacher and parent to closely monitored and receive added support as needed in small groups within the RTI framework and/or AIS. Additionally, Title III funds are utilized to provide Saturday enrichment programming specifically for ENL students to offer additional instructional intervention in speaking, listening, reading and writing support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] PS 57 uses data in a strategic way to instructionally support English Language Learners and guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework. We use the ELL Data Analysis Tool to identify specific subgroups of ELLs so that we can design effective instructional programs and/or interventions. Our school ensures that instruction begins with assessments that determine the necessary conditions for effectively promoting English language development. The framework is led by 5 objectives for participants: understand how RTI models supports instruction for ELLs; analyze assessment approaches alongside with required adjustments; data analysis that reveals patterns and trends; modifying the instructional core and supplemental supports for ELLs; supports at the school-level. Our school uses documented data to divide students into the 3 RTI Tier Model Assessment System: Tier 1 (Core of Instruction) informs instructional planning and supports whole-group scholar learning and meets at least 80% of students’ needs; Tier 2 (Double Dose of Instruction) Instruction targets smaller subsets (small group) of scholars, informs intervention and monitors progress; Tier 3 (Intensive Intervention) supports individualized instruction (small group or 1:1). 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In analyzing the data patterns across proficiency levels and grades using the RLAT, the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT information reveals that the students continue to demonstrate language development gains from grade to grade. We use the Ell Data Analysis Tool to evaluate and inform our ELL program. PS 57 has 95 ELLs and 8 former ELLs. Result analysis for the school 2017-2018 school year show 31 scholars performing at The Entering level; 20 at the Emerging level, 21 at the Transitioning level, 23 at the Expanding Level, and 8 attaining Commanding Level. Consideration to academic and social fluency in addition to NYSESLAT or NYSITELL data is used to cluster ELLs homogeneously or heterogeneously for targeted area instruction. PS 57’s objective is to develop proficient scholars and support the exit-out process. We use multiple data assessment tools in order to accomplish this. For example, the 2018 Spring in-house scoring of the NYSESLAT revealed most scholars in Grades 1-2 struggling in writing constructed responses. Many of the upper grades generally fared well in completing constructed responses. Unlike early childhood scholars, upper grade ELLs were able to write short constructed responses and long constructed responses. Of note, most of their writing flowed smoothly. Yet, some upper-grade students had difficulty writing well-constructed content-based essays that flowed nicely and thus were determined to be partially proficient on the rubric writing scale. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? PS 57 has established structures in place to disseminate the ELL population findings in order to make adjustments to our program. We make sure that our students’ second language development is considered in instructional decisions. We understand that in order for our English language learners (ELLs) to become successful students, they need to learn grade-level content as well as the English language skills needed to access that content. Therefore, we make sure that our ELLs benefit in regular classrooms using research-based ENL strategies for teaching the content areas. It has been proved that these strategies increase comprehension, learning, and interaction through modeling, acting out, gesturing, showing diagrams, and doing hands-on activities and experiments. Therefore we have established the following structures. In collaboration, we scaffold skills and strategies in order to address our ELL population needs. Part IV: ELL Programming 3  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. PS 57 student population is 544 students, of which 17.46% represents our English Language Learners (ELLs). Our ELL population is of 95 students. PS 57 organizational model is composed of six grades (Kindergarten through Fifth Grade). Classes are heterogeneous. They contain ELLs, Former ELLs, General Education students, and in some cases Special Education ICT students. Our ELL scholars remain together with their class throughout the school day. Exceptions are made for newly admitted scholars or scholars in need of intervention who may benefit from pull-out mandated or supplementary services. Numerous considerations are taken into account when grouping students. Data is examined and we consider factors such as the ELLs’ language proficiency, age, SIFE status, academic performance and needs. Our school offers a Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) program. The freestanding ENL program consists of two instructional program models: A K-5 Stand-Alone/Integrated Model and a 3rd grade ENL Self-Contained Model. The stand-alone ENL model is designed to develop English language skills so that students can be successful in content courses. Some of the activities that support this model are: explicit vocabulary instruction, charting, building background knowledge and experiences, visuals to stimulate discussion and graphic organizers. The Integrated ENL instruction builds English language skills through content area instruction. The focus is content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. Our 3rd grade Self-Contained ENL classroom is heterogeneous with Integrated ENL and Stand-alone ENL services. PS 57 retains instructional time and ensures comprehensive growth for ELLs in the curricula areas by endorsing its data-driven inclusion ENL/Sheltered Instruction Stand-Alone/Integrated program model, that is in accordance with CR Part 154 mandates. Teachers of ELLs follow rigorous CCLS aligned curricula to aid our scholars' development of the target language and to close the achievement gap. Building leaders endorse collaborative planning and provide ENL teachers access to work with pertinent grade level team members in order to develop units of study and supports that mirror the units being developed in the classroom. Rigorous school-wide curriculum guides and pacing calendars are adhered to and offer another structure or lens for instruction. Moreover, teachers are encouraged to keep articulation and group planning logs. Our ELL group sizes ranges from 5 to 10 scholars. The ENL teachers are able to offer differentiated data-driven instruction that is in accordance to the child’s needs and learning styles. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not Applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our building staff is knowledgeable of mandated ENL teaching blocks. The ENL coordinator gathers ATS reports such as the RLAT and the RLER to determine student eligibility and needs. Subsequently, placement is set up along with schedules and groupings that are designed according to the ELLs' proficiency level and modality. The number of ENL instructional units received is based on CR Part 154.2 regulations and students’ level of language proficiency as determined by the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. In our 3rd grade ENL Self-Contained class students receive their mandated ENL instructional minutes from their licensed ENL teacher using Stand-Alone and Integrated models within her classroom based on students' English proficiency levels. In our Freestanding K-5 students receive all instruction in English. Based on student proficiency levels, students receive the 4  integrated and stand-alone ENL instructional models from our licensed ENL teachers. The ENL teachers work in collaboration with the classroom teacher to plan lessons. The ENL teachers use effective research-based ENL strategies to make content comprehensible for the students. The ENL teachers and the classroom teachers use a parallel co-teaching approach to deliver Integrated ENL instruction. For example, the classroom teacher teaches the non-ELLs in one group while the ENL teacher provide instruction to the ELLs. The students are grouped heterogeneously base on their proficiency levels. For instance the students performing at the Entering and Emerging levels are grouped together to receive 360 minutes a week of ENL instruction. 180 minutes Stand-Alone and 180 minutes of Integrated. Therefore, the students performing at the Transitioning and Expanding level of proficiency are grouped together to receive 180 minutes a week of integrated ENL instruction. Furthermore, the students who have tested out of ENL within the past two years are grouped homogeneously to receive 90 minutes in Integrated ENL weekly instruction. Teaching schedules are distributed to administrators and pertinent classroom teachers. Schedules are adhered to in order to ensure that all ELL students receive all mandated minutes of service instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our school has 3 active New York State ESOL certified teachers ensuring instructional approaches and methods are in place so that content is comprehensible and meets CCLS demands. We ensure ELLs become proficient in English, the target language and prepare our ELLs not only for academic rigorous state grade assessments but also for future educational achievements by means of content area Stand-Alone/Integrated instruction that is rigorous and aligned to CCLS. Our Freestanding ENL program serve students in the entering, emergent, transitioning, expanding and commanding levels. They receive the mandated minutes per week of ENL instruction aligned with ELA Common Core Learning Standards using Stand-alone ENL and/or integrated ENL based on students' proficiency level. All students received the mandated 360, 180 or 90 minutes per week of ENL instruction accordingly as per CR Part 154.2 regulations. We offer scholars the opportunity to develop their social language and engage in hands-on academic activities with the numerous content areas. When content area instruction is taught in English, ENL strategies are consistently used. Scaffolding is implemented to help them meet the linguistic and academic demands of what is being taught. This structure is deliberate to ensure access and it is gradually removed when the students become skilled enough and ready to manage the content on their own. In addition, home language support is offered as necessary Lessons are taught using ENL methodologies such as Total Physical Response(TPR), CALLA (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach), scaffolding, bridging, and schema building, concept mapping, and contextualization. Scholars are also exposed to Holistic Language Learning Approaches, Explicit Instruction, Inquiry Based Learning, and Interdisciplinary-based Learning. ELLs’ instruction employs the same materials as our non-ELL programs and includes supplemental materials such as guided reading ENL level libraries. In addition, they are provided with optional English and native language versions of formal assessments. To ensure success, all English Language Learners are held to the same standards as the general education population. This is accomplished using an array of instructional materials that are comprised of and provide ENL foundations, theories, and methodologies. ENL-based supplemental materials include: Santillana Intensive English, Houghton Mifflin Leveled Readers, Teacher Created Materials Language Power, Attanasio & Associates Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT, and Reading A-Z online reading program. Our ELLs are exposed to mainstream classroom math (Go Math) and science texts that take ELLs language development needs into consideration. Charts, realia, manipulatives, and other approaches or tools such as field trips are employed in order to support language development. Our students are assessed throughout the units and groupings are changed in accordance with RTI model protocols. ENL teachers provide additional oral language support for the development of academic English in all content areas. 5  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Within ten days of initial enrollment new entrants who were identified as Spanish speaking ELLs are administered the Spanish LAB (Form B) so that staff can gauge a range of skills that scholars exhibit in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) Currently, there are 2 SIFE students at PS 57. We have examined the SIFE students history to determine any accommodations. SIFE students will be placed in ideal groups and learning environments that best meet their academic, language and social needs. We will also use funds and resources that will enable this population to secure achievement and make essential academic gains. Supplemental services for SIFE students may include intensive ENL, extended day program, reading and math intervention, summer school participation, one-to-one tutoring and greater parental outreach. b) Our ENL teachers have developed plans and instructional goals and strategies for all ELL newcomers. The ENL teachers assist them in developing their basic interpersonal communication skills with a focus on oral language development. Our ENL teachers also work alongside classroom teachers so that the new student receives optimum support and interventions. Newcomers may be paired with a classroom teacher or “class buddy” who is proficient in the child’s first and target language. The classroom teachers receive professional development and additional dialogue on ENL methodologies and strategies for fostering and maintaining a Sheltered English classroom. Interactions can range from fostering language that is relevant to everyday life situations, creating context rich classroom environment and wait-time considerations. Our newcomers are exposed to numerous resources such as additional time at classroom listening centers, I-Ready and other Educational online programs, English Language Learning software, differentiated and age appropriate content-based supplemental materials, and native language content math books and glossaries. In addition, our newcomers are invited to attend the Language Academy afterschool program and/or the Saturday Academy. An instructional plan is in place in order to prepare ELLs for ELA testing after one year. Our school makes the process comfortable for the ELL. From the onset, our ELLs and parents are advised about this process. We utilize appropriate and differentiated instructional materials and ENL strategies that will help the ELL acquire the target language alongside a base that prepares them for future high stakes exams. Additional small group instruction is provided for scholars determined to be at-risk of academic failure. We ensure that scholars are met individually in order to discuss their individual strengths and needs. Parents are also made aware of their child’s performance by means of personal telephone communication, in-house conferences, or through the mail. c) Our ENL teachers have instructional goals and plans for ELLs receiving 4-6 years of service. Appropriate ENL and strategies methodologies will be included into learning experiences that focus on weak language modalities as per NYSESLAT reports. Other relevant periodic ELA and Math-related forms of concrete data will be used to drive instruction. For the most part, this population of ELLs’ strengths lie in listening and speaking comprehension. They lack in reading and writing skills. Therefore, we emphasize reading and writing. Our school employs rigorous collaborative group work and cooperative learning experiences such as jigsaw that promote problem-solving and accountable talk. Lessons provide explicit instruction in the structure of English language, background building, and bridging, academic vocabulary development. Supplemental strategies and services are afforded for ELLs who are struggling academically. Small group activities, Wilson Reading Program, Intensive ENL, and Fordham University tutoring is provided for selected scholars. As always, scholars are encouraged to participate in after school programs and other celebrations. Additionally, we stress that scholars are met with individually to discuss their strengths and needs and parents are made aware of their child’s 4-6 years of service status its standardized testing exemption implications. d) PS 57 provides careful consideration for in danger of becoming and/or Long-Term ELLs. Aside from using ENL methodologies previously mentioned, we provide supplemental techniques, strategies and scaffold instruction. Long term ELLs may receive additional individualized support and instruction to help meet their educational needs. Academic Intervention Services (AIS), ELA/Math support services, peer tutoring, one-to-one tutoring, counseling, Intensive ENL, and support or focus on weak linguistic modalities are considered and assigned to targeted ELLs. In addition to supplemental services, observations and data collection, in danger of becoming and/or Long-Term ELLs may be discussed at length by 6  the AIS Team, upon where alternative services or programming may be assigned. e) Support plans are in effect for ELLs who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT. Services such as counseling, ENL Integrated instruction, student (briefings/next steps) orientations about the exit out process, and parental outreach are carried out in order to facilitate this transition. Our school articulates with parents and students in order to make them aware of special testing accommodations that will remain for two years after attaining proficiency. Former ELLs are also encouraged to attend our after school programs. In addition, ENL teachers provide resources for lesson planning, scaffolding concepts, and academic vocabulary support to the classroom teacher so that former ELLs will continue to be provided with the necessary tools for language development. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL students with disabilities participate in a high quality, rigorous curriculum that is CCLS aligned, culturally-relevant, and appropriately differentiated. English Language Learner Students with Disabilities (ELL-SWD) participate in all school wide instructional programs and activities. Staff members are encouraged to participate in professional development activities directed at enhancing the outcomes of ELL-SWDs. The ENL coordinator and the IEP Supervisor communicate and work together along with general education teachers to ensure that Educational Assistant, and related personnel, such as therapists and social workers, meet the individualized needs of the student within the ELL-SWD’s education programming. Entering/Emerging students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, 180 Stand-Alone and 180 Integrated. Transitioning/Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ESL instructions in addition to ELA instruction. Supplemental minutes of ESL instruction are offered depending on language needs. IEP review mandates is generated and ENL teachers take part in reviewing annual goals and are involved in the IEP re-evaluation processes. Teachers provide Positive Behavioral Intervention and Supports (PBIS) practices and strategies for all students to increase academic performance, improve safety, decrease problem behavior, and establish a positive school culture. We provide instructional expectations for all assignments in multiple formats that include written or oral. Scholars are taught alternate strategies needed to meet standards such as different approaches to learning math, special text editing strategies, behavior management tools such as self-talk, anger management, etc. We provide students with disabilities access to differentiated instruction that includes: scaffolding, flexible grouping, learning/interest centers, manipulatives, varying the length of time for a student to master or complete the content, and encourage advanced learners to pursue topics in greater depth. Our teachers include supplemental curriculum materials specifically designed to help students acquire general education content to meet the standards and benchmarks that apply to all students. ELLs identified as having special needs are given modified instruction and assessed based on their IEP goals and testing modifications. ELL-SWDs utilize the same grade-level materials that general education use. They include: Go Math, Ready Gen, social studies and science texts. Lessons are adapted or modified using supplemental materials and strategies to make input comprehensible. Rigorous NYSESLAT preparation is instructed within the grade band to include content curricula lessons that employ general education texts and include content material adaptations to make lessons more comprehensible and level appropriate. When necessary, teachers re-visit curricular content and provide additional guided practice before, after, or as appropriate, during class time. Students are also provided with extended learning opportunities to increase their rate of learning. Scholars also monitor and chart their own progress using clearly defined performance standards that include rubrics. Our ELL-SWDs are provided with encouragement, gentle/polite reminders, verbal prompts, and additional “wait-time.” ELL-SWDs may be provided access to assistive technology and other accommodations such as a text reader to facilitate reading comprehension and efficient assignment completion. In addition, we teach and emphasize student self-advocacy skills such as testing accommodation awareness. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school provides our ELL-SWDs with specially designed curricular and instructional programming that is aligned with the general curriculum to the greatest degree possible. In order to meet the diverse needs of all ELL-SWD they are placed in 7  classroom settings as recommended on their IEP. The students are placed in ICTs, Self-Contained SE, and mainstream setting receiving SETTS mandated services. They receive ENL mandated services using a combination of Stand-alone ENL and or Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area based on language proficiency level. General and special educators of ELLs with disabilities plan collectively and collaborate to ensure success for students with disabilities. Time is offered for general and special educators to work together to develop, implement, and monitor student IEPs. Furthermore, we examine the scope and sequence of instruction to ensure general and special education teachers work toward common core state standards and benchmarks. Teachers make use of supplemental curriculum materials specifically designed to help students acquire general education content that meets the standards and benchmarks that apply to all students. Our school provides learning/interest centers, manipulatives, visuals, grade-level and supplemental materials, varies the length of time for a student to master or complete the content, and encourage advanced learners to pursue topics in greater depth. We ensure evaluation and data collection takes place regularly so that flexible groupings and scheduling accommodations are carried out as needed. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. PS 57 has intervention programs in place that target ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas. ELLs learning needs are identified and groupings and strategies are applied to meet these needs. For example, in order to provide content area optimum support, ENL teachers may push into a student’s science class once a week. Moreover, during guided reading push-in instruction, ENL teachers may also select to make use of guided reading books that are aligned to a certain science unit of study. Our school offers Math AIS, ELA, and Science AIS supplemental services. The after school program also focuses on reading comprehension and writing through a thematic approach. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs makes use of the following materials: Words Their Way, Kaplan Advantage: New York ELA & Math, Houghton Mifflin Leveled Readers, Attanasio & Associates NYSESLAT, and I-Ready online program. Intervention providers make use of charts, realia, manipulatives, and other ENL approaches that support language development and in ELA, math and other content areas. Additional interventions include: •ELL “Before School” Morning Programming *Targeting Beginning ELLs (Grades K-2) Group Size: 5-8 Scholars *Target Long-Term/At-Risk ELLs (Grades 3-5) Group Size: 5-8 Scholars •R.E.A.D Afterschool Intervention Program for Grade 1 scholars at risk (12 current ELLs fall into this category). Sessions are twice a week for 30 minutes with a 1:1 tutoring ratio. •S.P.I.R.E – (Grades 2-5) targets low and at-risk scholars (ELLs included). Sessions are three times a week for 30 minutes with a 5:1 ratio. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This current school year, students in grades K-5 participate in focus small group instruction during our daily reading and math differentiation period. In addition, they participate in the I-Ready after-school program two times per week to improve literacy skills in reading, writing and math. In addition, Teachers and other staff will continue to have vast out of the building professional development opportunities to attend and at a later date turn-key to in-house staff members. Based on our scoring NYSESLAT team findings, our 3-5 the Language Academy afterschool will largely emphasize in writing. Moreover, students in Grades 3-5 have been provided with individual laptops. Students are able to conduct rigorous research and develop technology awareness and fluency. Our ELLs will also have the opportunity to make museum visits and explore the language and critical thinking that is necessary for them to examine art works. Museum trips and guided tours will be integrated into the 8  curriculum. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. At PS 57 our ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs. ELLs are invited to the I-Ready after school program with the rest of student population twice a week to strengthen literacy and math skills. In addition, we offer some school programs tailored specifically to Ells. For example, The Language Academy, The ENL Academy, and the ENL Learning through Play Saturday Academy. Furthermore, we offer a variety of after school and/or supplemental services. Our ELLs are invited to attend Architecture Through Visual Arts, Tyco Dancing, Science, Bangra Dancing, The Crescent Chorus, Robotics, Gardening, and STEM. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. At PS 57 the use of technology continues to strengthen the academic rigor already present in the classroom. All of our classrooms are equipped with Smart Boards that have made teaching more interactive and has enhanced visual capabilities to help meet the learning needs of students’ with varying learning styles. In addition, all ELLs have access to laptops and a computer laboratory. ELLs conduct internet based research, create power-point presentations and writing reports. They also make use of audio listening and phonics development interactive activities by accessing websites. ENL teachers are also equipped with I-Pads. All classrooms from all grades are equipped with Smartboards. Software (Math and Literacy) programs are employed. Content area instruction is taught with an interdisciplinary approach. Content instruction is also infused into our ELA (Teachers College) and Mathematics (Go-Math) curricula. In addition, teachers make use of the NYC Science and Social Studies curricula course books. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our school makes available and validates native language support and cultural activities that are particular to the child through means of art and literature. Bilingual Spanish-English books are available in the library. Teachers also train students to use tools such as “google translate” and glossaries to access translation. Our goal is to assist our ELLs construct meaning from academic materials and experiences in English while respecting their native language and its culture. Our school makes certain that we: • determine student language strengths and limitations to establish academic needs; • make use of native language support for content teaching in first and succeeding years through available content instructional materials; • pair teachers who are familiar with the entitled student’s first language; •“buddy-up” newcomers with students who are familiar with their native language • encourage native language support from student’s peer; • make native language books and online libraries and media resources available to students; • create multicultural activities that value ELLs first language; • provide bilingual glossaries; • teach skills and strategies that assist second language acquisition (recognizing cognates). 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. PS 57 makes every effort to provide services and support which correspond to ENLs’ ages and grade levels. Students’ educational backgrounds, age and proficiency levels are considered when forming groups. Groups are flexible, with change occurring to reflect student needs throughout the year. We believe and asserts that all supports, resources, and classroom materials must be authentic and developmentally appropriate for age and grade level. Therefore, all language services correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. 9  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All ELLs have access to laptops and a computer laboratory. ELLs conduct internet based research, create power-point presentations and writing reports, make use of audio listening and phonics development interactive activities, access websites that require research. ENL teachers are also equipped with I-Pads. All classrooms are equipped with Smartboards. Software (Math and Literacy) programs are employed. Content area instruction is taught with an interdisciplinary approach. Content instruction is also infused into our ELA (Teachers College) and Mathematics (Go-Math) curricula. In addition, teachers make use of the NYC Science and Social Studies curricula course books. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school does not offer any activities before the beginning of the school year. However, ENL staff members recommend useful English language development websites that facilitate second language acquisition. In addition, our ELLs including ELL-SWD that are not mandated to attend summer school are invited to the ELLs Summer in the City Enrichment Program. The goal of the program is to develop English language proficiency, focusing on oral language and vocabulary development; in addition to math support. At the start of the school year and throughout the school year teachers are provided with strategies and methodologies that foster language development and give insights or a better understanding into the world of the second language learner. Scholars are buddied-up or placed in classrooms with fluent students whom may be of assistance in the event that the language is not spoken by the classroom teacher or other pupils 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives are not offered to our ELLs. Our school makes available native language support and cultural activities that are particular to the child through means of art and literature. Bilingual Spanish-English, French-English and other language books are available in the library. Teachers also train students to use tools such as “google translate” and/or glossaries to access translation. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NOT APPLICABLE Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At PS 57 all teachers of ELLs hold the appropriate teaching certificates and use their knowledge of research based concepts to foster students’ language acquisition. To enhance such knowledge, teachers take opportunities to attend professional development sessions at school, Field Support Center and at NYCDOE sites. In addition, PS 57 provides staff with professional development to support the understanding Language Allocation Policy (LAP). The ENL teachers work with other pedagogues to ensure that LAP policy foundations are understood and incorporated into daily classroom instruction. 0  Our ENL staff consults and works closely with ELLs’ classroom teachers to discuss themes such as content area support, differentiation, and best ELL practices are best practices for all. The ENL coordinator attends to monthly ELL Liaisons’ Professional development sessions conducted by the ELL Services Coordinator. Rigorous CCLS aligned data-driven training is offered. Sessions are receptive of students’ linguistic skills while also developing strategies to better assist our students in meeting grade-appropriate proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT as well as other New York State standardized CCLS exams. Our calendar of Professional Development dates is prepared monthly and additional topics are presented based on mandated requirements, needs of staff and teachers' specific requests. Professional development topics have been offered and are revisited yearly. Professional Development Sessions include a myriad of topics ranging from: •Co-Teaching Models for Teachers of ELLs •Examining Rigorous Instruction that is CCLS Aligned •ELLs and Academic Language •Effective Instruction for ELLs using an RTI Approach •ENL strategies aligned to CCLS standards •Scaffolding •Teacher Talk Repertoire Awareness •Differentiated Instruction •Oral Language Development •NYSESLAT Readiness ELL Professional Development Opportunities •DOE sponsored PD sessions (dates vary) The ENL Coordinator attends outside professional development sessions that are offered by the NYC Department of Education and then plans professional development activities that serve to provide all staff members with methodologies that address the needs of all ELLs. Professional development topics for this school year include: *Developing Student’s Oral Language *Collaborative Team Teaching-ENL Strategies *We are ALL Teachers of ELLs *Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs * Understanding the language proficiency levels of our ELLs.* The New Language Arts Progressions *CCLS aligned Go Math Webinar *Implementing a Successful RTI Model with English Language Learners 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We have an expansive professional development plan for ALL teachers of ELLs at PS 57. Our school provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. As per CR Part 154.2, 15% total hours ELL-specific PD for All Teachers and 50% total hours ELL specific PD for ENL teachers. In addition, our certified ENL teachers attend professional development sessions at school, network PDs, Field Support Center and at NYCDOE sites and others. The information and practices from these PDs are then turn-keyed to all staff, in order to ensure professional development that spans grade levels and content areas. Our ENL teachers also plan and present in-house PDs to teachers of ELLs, such as Content Strategies for ELLs. Many of these PD’s are determined at the beginning of the year and/or on a monthly basis on mandated requirements, needs of staff and teachers' specific requests so teachers know well in advance and can also work towards an area of need. General Education Teachers are offered the opportunity to attend outside professional development opportunities that may exist. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 1  PS 57 feels that ELLs’ parents are an integral part of the school community. Therefore, learning outcomes needs, and expectations are discussed, presented, and addressed during Parent-Teacher Conferences, Annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs in addition to parent-teacher conferences and initial parent orientation, workshops, teacher outreach, and assemblies. Sometimes, in lieu of a face-to-face meeting, the ELL teachers give the parents a phone call to inform them about their child’s language development progress, the goals of the program, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. In addition, Parents have the opportunity to participate in School Leadership Team Meetings and have input during Quality Reviews. Our school keeps parents informed through monthly calendars, telephone calls, our school website, school tweeter account and other resources to better aid the child in making progress. Our parent-coordinator's efforts to maintain healthy and on-going helpful and informative relationships with parents that is outstanding. Our school has various translators who speak English and Spanish. They include our P.A, P.C., Guidance Counselor, Administrators, School Aides, ENL Coordinator, Teachers and Office Staff. We also have staff members who speak French. In addition, the staff will use the Language and Translation Services to interpret for parents who speak other languages. Translated copies of forms, letters, or invites are provided to caregivers who speak languages other than Spanish and English. This includes languages such as French and Arabic. Our school also makes use of the Automated School Messenger that delivers calls to parents in their home language. The system operates in a myriad of languages. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS 57 feels that parental involvement extends itself beyond Parent-Teachers Conferences. Our school is a parent friendly building that welcomes and encourages parental involvement. Parent Association plan and engage themselves in various school community activities. They include: seminars, workshops, fundraising, field trip activities, class celebrations, trophy award ceremonies, bake and food sales, seasonal events, and assemblies. PS 57 feels that ELLs’ parents are an integral part of the school community. We provide workshops that are translated in Spanish, the second most dominant language in the school building. Sessions address the needs of parents and target the academic expectations and promotional standards for each grade. Parents of ELLs students are invited to participate in NYSESLAT information session provided by the ENL teachers. In addition, Parents of scholars in grades 3-5 receive training on NYS assessments and also receive materials and instructional strategies that they can employ at home with their ELLs. Our parents are offered our Parent Handbook. It includes information regarding assessment and accountability, state and city academic content standards, and serves to outline the role that parents may play in fostering ownership of scholars' educational experiences Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mary Blandino-Sanchez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Crescent School School DBN: 12x057 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Mary Blandino-Sanchez Principal Jennell Tirado Assistant Principal Rosemary Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Vivian Zapata, ENL Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Diane Arias Parent Laurence E. Sachs, ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Heather Stanziani, ENL Teacher/Subject Area NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 6/21/2018 6/21/2018 6/21/2018 6/21/2018 6/21/2018 6/21/2018 6/21/2018 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X057 School Name: P.S. 57 Crescent Superintendent: Rafaela Espinal The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (Vivian Zapata ENL Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our Progress Report data-findings show that 98% of parents feel that our school communicates with them in a language that they understand. •Some findings show that some parents have experienced a disconnect due to language diversity or the possible lack of communication. We will make use of the interpretation unit’s services to make adequate outreach for alternative languages such as French and Arabic. •Bilingual Spanish and English speaking staff provide translation services. •Parent-related activities are presented with a Spanish Translator. 5  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written 166 3 32.17% 0.58% 167 3 Oral Preferred Percent Oral 32.36% 0.58% Spanish French 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Monthly calendars, handbooks, class and school newsletters, after-school programs and events, parent-teacher conferences, testing dates and information Monthly translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In-house translation; DOE provided translations 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences November, January and March interpretation service(s)? In-house interpreters; DOE provided interpretation services 6  Kindergarten and new student intake interviews - Throughout the year Curriculum Night September IEP Meetings Throughout the year In-house interpreters; DOE provided interpretation services In-house interpreters; DOE provided interpretation services In-house interpreters; DOE provided interpretation services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In-house interpreters; automated school messenger Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will be provided with Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and it will be reviewed during whole staff meeting, along with a review of the resources we have in-house to support parent communication. Our parent coordinator will be the point person for teachers/staff requesting interpretation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 57 will provide translated notifications requirements via: •PS 57 Website •S.L.T. Meetings with Parent Involvement •P.A. Council Meetings •Monthly Parent Calendar •Automated School Messenger •Orientation for Newly Admitted ELLs 7  •Utilize Bilingual staff (IEP teacher, School Psychologist, and School Social Worker) during annuals, tri-annuals, and initial meetings with parents. •Blue cards, registration forms, and codes of conduct booklets are available in alternate languages. •Utilized bilingual staffing so that there is no communication barrier between parents and school members at all times Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Surveys, staff conversations with parents, parent coordinator 8 
