 11X087 School Name: P.S. 087 BRONX Principal: DONNA ANAMAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: P.S. 087x 321100010087 K-5 1935 Bussing Avenue 718-324-5188 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 11X087 718-325-1148 Fax: Donna L.Anaman DAnaman@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Donna L.Anaman Antonio Jacobs Jessica Pabellon Donna L.Anaman Ms. GinaKetter N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 11 MeishaRoss-Porter Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Avenue, Bronx NY 10469 Superintendent’s Office Address: MRoss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2620 Phone Number: 718 325 1148 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zarega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Donna L.Anaman Antonio Jacobs Jessica Pabellon Gina Ketter Patsy Quashie Tania Lopes *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ AP/Data Specialist Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) JessyVigiletti Lorraine Barnett DeviaMangal SavitriThompson Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent PTATreasurer Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Our Mission • To provide each student with academically rigorous curricula that provides opportunities for growth and the development of the skills and strategies to become critical thinkers and problem solvers.   • To provide students with numerous and varied opportunities to develop a love of reading, mathematics, the arts, the study of science, and social studies. • To provide opportunities for students to gain an understanding of themselves, their social and emotional growth and the complex world in which they live. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 87 is proudly nestled in the Northeast Bronx among well-maintained one and two family homes. The P. S. 87 family reflects the hopes and dreams of its Caribbean immigrant community. Bordered by Mt. Vernon on the north and Yonkers on the west, P. S. 87 blends the calm of the suburbs with the excitement of the city, with all of New York City's cultural riches a bus ride away. We are a vibrant community of first and second -generation immigrants. The majority of our families hail from the English Speaking Caribbean. Also represented are families from the Spanish speaking Caribbean, and Africa. Many of our parents and grandparents were educated on the island of Jamaica, bringing with them a rich traditional British education. This tradition nurtures a healthy respect for education and strong work ethic. Our parents are very responsive to and are supportive of the school's high expectations for academic excellence and good citizenship. Philosophy "Imagine the Possibilities!" The motto at P.S. 87 is “Imagine the Possibilities.” This speaks to our belief that all children have innate potential and it is the work of our school, together with parents, to provide students with varied experiences so that they can develop their unique abilities and gifts. The administration and faculty of P. S. 87 devote their energies and resources to provide students with a quality education utilizing best practices and quality materials. Our goal is to prepare our students to meet the challenges of a world that is constantly changing. Our expectation is to provide an education where all students achieve high academic standards based on targeted, differentiated instruction. Students have access to a technology, science lab and a music room where, in addition to general music, they learn to play the recorders in third grade and join the School Orchestra (violin, viola, cello and bass) in fourth and fifth grade. Academics P.S. 87 implements a Common Core aligned curriculum in English Language Arts and Math. Teacher Teams meet weekly to review lessons and make adjustments to the curriculum when necessary based on student data. Struggling students are also provided with Academic Interventions during the school day, after school and Saturday to support them in meeting standards. Our school wide Science Fair brings teachers and parents together each year. All teachers use SMART boards to deliver inter-disciplinary lessons while students have their own laptops that provide differentiated instruction that meets the needs of all learners. Teacher Teams use Google Docs as a school wide collaboration tool for lesson and unit planning. Social Emotional Learning Emotional intelligence, which is the ability to manage the emotion of one’s self in a healthy and productive manner, is as much an indicator of personal success as the intellectual quotient. Social skills are stressed through our Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) to support students in seeing the connection between themselves and the inter-connected community and world they live in. The values of Respect, Responsibility and Safety are stressed. Strategic Collaborations and Initiatives In recognition of one of P. S. 87’s primary challenges, providing multiple entry points in American culture and to strengthen students' background knowledge, we have established several collaborations with New York cultural 0  institutions. Learning does not only occur within the walls of the school building. P.S. 87’s “ Going Somewhere” program enables teachers to take advantage of the many cultural institutions in New York City to expand the curriculum and expose students to rich learning outside the classroom walls. P.S. 87's Track Program collaborates with New York Road Runners Foundation. Our on-site track, designed by former students, allows students to participate in on-site and competitive events around the City. The hallways of P.S. 87 are adorned with art work and sculptures produced by students in K-5 through a visual arts partnership with Studio in a School. Students in Grades 4 and 5 learn to play the violin, viola, cello and bass with the support of our partnership with Education Through Music. We will continue our dance collaboration with Music for Many. First and second grade students participate in dance culminating in a performances for parents. These performances are connected with trips to see a Broadway production. Students are introduced to Robotics in Grades 4 and 5. Using the materials from the V-Tech Robotics program students work in teams to build and program robots. Parent Involvement Parent involvement is highly valued at P. S. 87. The school enjoys an active and supportive PTA /Title 1 Committee. Parents are included in all aspects of “school life” through volunteering within the school, escorting school trips, creating community building events and attending parent workshops designed to provide information about the curriculum and to provide strategies that support them in their roles as the first teachers of their children. Fathers are involved through our “Fatherhood in the Twenty-First Century ” initiative. In fact, one parent stated to the Quality Reviewer, "This school supports families. It is still growing, both academically and socially. This is a beautiful school.” A recent graduate, Cheyenne, sums up our school best. She said, “You learn so much and create new dreams and make them come true. If you are in trouble someone will always be there to cheer you up. In the beginning you don’t know much and you are shy. You can start coming out and learn and be creative. The best part is that you learn and learn and learn until you reach your final destination. There will always be a part of this school that is so tremendous.” Cheyenne Acosta, Graduate, June 2014. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Student Populations Our small population of English as a New Language students (ENL) are serviced by an ENL Teacher and our Special Needs students are serviced in an Integrated Co-Teaching Class (ICT) on each grade and in the smaller setting (12:1:1) classrooms. New arrivals from the English speaking Caribbean (12.4%) produce a subgroup of students who are challenged by a change of culture and countries where English is spoken as a dialect. Success in literacy is bound with a familiarity with cultural cues and subtleties barely noticed by the generational resident, but obscure to the recent immigrant. Schema, (background knowledge), historical and popular culture, are crucial in reading comprehension and both narrative and informational writing. In many instances, although our students speak English, they lack the experiential vocabulary and distinct Americanisms that much of our formal education system requires. Essentially, American English is a second dialect for our students. Additionally, our students may have experienced "interrupted formal schooling" but are not able to access ESL services because their Home Language Surveys indicate that "English" is spoken at home . In addition, these students often arrive in the country having been raised by family members to join parents who immigrated to the US to create a better life for themselves and their families. It may 1  have been several years since parent and child are reunited. The adjustment for both parents and children alike can be challenging. These students need additional supports in developing literacy and math skills and emotional support throughout their adjustment and parents also need support in accessing resources to assist them in their children's education. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress during the 2017-18 school year was in Rigorous Instruction. The school engaged in three initiatives to strengthen the schools' core instructional program. These initiatives were: a) Small group instruction in reading using the model, 10:10:10 b) Increase students' ability to solve multi-step word problems using Exemplar Math in a 5-day protocol c) Supporting students' writing through using Lucy Calkins' Teachers College Writing Units of Study. Although the changes described above solidified our Literacy and Math Block there was a dip in the ELA and math scores in 2016-17. However, there were many signs of progress. There was an increase of 6% in the New York State ELA test in Grade 4 overall and a 15% increase in the performance of girls,. There was a 5% increase in girls overall and a 9% increase in Grade 5 girls. Grade 4 boys increased by 2% over the previous year. The 2017-18 NYS ELA and Math results showed marked improvement. 1) ELA scores for students in Grades 3, 4 and 5 increased overall by 7%. Grade 3 increased by 12% and Grade 5 by 13% over the previous year. 2) Math scores for students in Grades 3, 4 and 5 increased overall by 13%. Grade 3 increased by 23% and Grade 5 by 19%. The key areas of focus for the 2018-19 school year will be to continue to deepen these three initiatives with increased professional learning support for teachers. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X087 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 594 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 31 31 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 28 19 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 78.6% % Reduced Lunch 2.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 3.2% 17.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.92 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 69 69 92.6% 5.2% 20.4% 69.9% 5.9% 5.9% 4 8% 7.6 36.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Key Areas of Progress a) Sharp increases in the number of students who are Proficient in ELA and Math. b) K-3 Early Reading Matters Grant develops teacher pedagogy in the teaching of reading that includes the collection of data that drives planning and instruction. c) Use of Go Math Chapter tests to track student growth in math and provide swift interventions through Do Nows and Formative Friday re-teach. School’s Strengths: The Quality Review indicator 1.1 was rated Proficient in 2016-17. During the 2016-17 Quality Review the following strengths were noted:  School resources are used and allocated in a manner that supports the school's instructional goals. Additionally, there is a structure that allows teachers to meet regularly to focus on instruction. Resources such as time, materials, and organization result in the meaningful student work products that are evident throughout the school and display challenging academic tasks.  Curricula is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and planned and adjusted as needed based on student classroom and assessment data. There is coherence in the curricula which promotes aspects of college and career readiness for all students.  Teachers use data from common assessments to adjust teaching and use rubrics in order to guide students towards meeting their goals. Students are provided with clear actionable feedback that provides next steps. Curricula are adjusted for students as needed based on the feedback teachers provide students. School leadership regularly communicates high expectations to staff regarding professionalism, instruction, and expectations connected to college and career readiness. There is a system of accountability for high expectations that all teachers are aware of. Additionally, all students and their families receive ongoing feedback and support with respect to student progress.   Teachers are engaged in regular, collaborative, structured inquiry-based meetings that promote Common Core Standards and the instructional shifts. Additionally, teachers have opportunities to take on leadership roles throughout the school. Teacher's instructional practices and leadership capacity are being supported and strengthened and they have a voice in key decisions throughout the school. 4  Identified Priority Need: The Early Reading Matters grant comes with a sophisticated tracker that accurately measures student growth in reading. It highlights students who are one and two years below level and the corresponding connection with poor attendance of those students. As a result of the careful analysis of the trackers we found a strong correlation between students scoring low on the Fountas and Pinnell reading scale and very poor attendance. As a result of the careful analysis of Go Math Chapter Tests and weekly formative assessments we found the following: 1) Students lacked fluency is basic math facts 2) The need to supplement the Go Math curriculum with resources such as EngageNY particularly in the area of place value 3) Students need constant repetition and practice in key concepts to solidify their understanding 4) Integrate the use of manipulatives throughout the grades 5) Increase discussion in the math classroom. The District has partnered with the City in the Algebra for All initiative. As part of this initiative, Grade 5 will be de-compartmentalized for math and science and ELA and Social Studies. The main goals of Algebra for All is to have every student complete Algebra no later than the end of 9th grade and to provide every 8th grade student who is ready access to an Algebra for All class. This work begins at the elementary school level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Grade 5 Math will be de-compartmentalized as part of the District Algebra for All initiative and student proficiency will increase in math as evidenced by the New York State Math Test from 24% in 2017-18 to 34% in 2018-19. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  300 minutes of math instruction per week Formative Fridays: Use Formative Fridays to re-teach Schedule Algebra for All in-school coaching sessions Attend Algebra for All Administrator sessions Grade 5 Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Cabinet Algebra for All District Initiative Teachers Teachers Administrators Use of weekly formative assessment data checks that provides information for re-teaching on Formative Fridays. Teachers IO (Formerly Datacation) scanning of assessments for rapid turnaround of information Go Math End of Chapter Tests every 4-6 weeks to inform instruction, Formative Friday re-teach and Do Now's Increase use of iReady math to meet individual students' needs with a focus on Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners and recent arrivals from the Caribbean with interrupted formal schooling who do not qualify for English Language Learner support due to the fact that English is considered their first language. Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Algebra for All Coach Cabinet Teacher Leaders Grade 5 Students Sept. 2018 to June 2019 Cabinet Teacher Leaders Math teachers attend three weeks of Algebra for All training in the Summer and ongoing during the school year. Teachers Paraprofessional August 2018 to June 2019 Algebra for All Cabinet and Assistant Principal 6  Math Team, led by an Assistant Principal will meet twice a month. Send two teachers and a paraprofessional to attend Family Math Night District professional development 3b – Parent and Family Engagement assigned to Math Team Paraprofessional How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Engage families in two Family Math events spearheaded by two teachers and a paraprofessional Engage families in workshops that highlight the different technology programs within the school that can be used at home Inform parents through Newsletters when a new skill will be taught and schedule hands on workshops regarding that skill. Parents will have monthly access to grades through Pupilpath. The Parent Coordinator will be responsible for implementation and the Cabinet will monitor implementation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule time for weekly professional learning and common planning time. Schedule time for weekly Instructional and Vertical Team meetings with math teachers in Grade 5. Provide substitute coverage to support Instructional Team Meetings, professional learning and feedback sessions Provide substitute coverage for the release of teachers to attend Borough and City Professional Development, inter-visitations and work with Algebra for All Coach. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 Mid-Year iReady mid-year assessment Predictive score will show that 30% of students are on track to proficiency in June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) iReady Mid-Year Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School’s Strengths: 2018-19 mark the third year that our school will be supported by a resource person from the Chancellor's Thrive Initiative. The social worker assigned to our school attends weekly meetings to discuss students' emotional growth and development and supports the school by recommending resources. Classroom teachers were supported in learning to recognize early signs and symptoms of psychological distress (including depression, anxiety and suicidal thoughts) and reduce classroom disturbances so that all students can feel safe and supported. All staff took the Kognitos (an avatar based online resource) training to identify and support students in emotional distress. School’s Priority Needs: 1) Boys make up the majority of students in need of a crisis paraprofessional and are placed in the more restrictive environment (12:1:1) and perform below level in ELA than girls based on academic and referral data. 2) Re-visit and revamp PBIS, monitoring of Behavior Intervention Plans and the inclusion of the increased number of 1:1 paras in the building in training related to students' social and emotional needs. 3) There was a sharp increase in the number of incidents reported in the Online Occurrence Reporting System. Four students were responsible for 100 of the incidents. Most of these incidents were occurring in the classroom. Teachers who completed the School Environment Survey also showed that student behavior was an area that needed more attention. 4) Re-examine our beliefs and practices, individual and school biases as it relates to servicing students of color (particularly young men) in our school. Revision of our Mission and Vision statement to reflect who are are and what we stand for today. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, an Equity and Excellence Committee will be formed made up of stakeholders across the school to explore the impact of current practices and strategies for addressing the social, emotional and academic needs of boys in our school. The committee will work in a cross-school Instructional Focus Collaborative group with three 9  other schools in the District to collaborate and support our schools in addressing disparities that impact the performance and behavior of boys in our school. Four inter-school visits will be conducted, 18 boys will be involved in the Woodlawn Leadership and Legacy Program and 5 boys will attend the Cross-School Instructional Collaborative group Mentoring Program. These efforts to engage boys and for them to feel a sense of belonging will reduce reportable incidents from 172 to 142. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Members of the Equity Team will attend the Eagle Academy Summer Institute professional development to deepen our Equity work to more effectively engage young men of color and develop an action plan. Male Students Teachers September 2018 to October 2019 Principal The Equity Team will develop and execute the House system within the school. Assistant Principal In Charge of Special Education Weekly behavior data analysis with a special focus on boys and Students with Disabilities to inform behavior interventions and monthly House assemblies. Selected Paraprofessionals Teachers on Equity Committee Equity Team representatives will attend the 2018 National Summit for Courageous Conversations Equity Team representatives will attend the Culturally Relevant Instructional Coaching series The Equity Team will meet monthly to review and disaggregate the OORS data, SWISS data, attendance data, participation in enrichment activities data, ELA and Math data and referral data to determine trends and brainstorm supports and solutions Guidance Counselors Para Professionals Instructional Focus Collaborative Inter-visitation Teams 1 Conduct 3 inter-visitations with the schools involved in Instructional Focus Collaborative Continue to create pathways for engagement such as School Orchestra, Robotics, Track, Basketball, Soccer, Mandarin, Brotherhood Club for Boys and other after school clubs. All Students Male Students October 2018 to May 2019 PE Teacher Administrators Use the CHAMPS grant to implement an early morning "Breakfast and Basketball" program for boys. Provide opportunities for Paraprofessionals to take on leadership responsibilities in the House structure Paras September 2018-May 2019 Assistant Principal in Charge of Special Education Guidance Counselor Provide opportunities for student leadership within the House structure. Students October to May 2019 Cabinet Five students will participate in a monthly Leadership session with other students from the Instructional Focus Collaborative schools in a leadership and mentoring program 18 students will participate in the Leadership and Legacy program with Woodlawn Cemetery. Teacher and Para leadership in Houses 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Engage parents in the House structure through workshops and enlist their support. Provide workshops to engage parents in a discussion regarding the social, emotional and academic development and success of boys of color. Provide workshops on bullying, suicide prevention and positive behavior interventions Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2  ● Schedule HOUSE committee meetings and assemblies ● SWISS annual fee ● Per session for teachers and administrator for evening parent workshop & enrichment activities * Enrichment Clubs such as Orchestra "F-Status" Teacher, Robotics, Dance, Film Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By October 2018 - The House names, student elections and the first House assemblies will be held. By November 2018 - Staff will revise the schools Mission and Vision Statement. By January 2019 - Students will be familiar with the House structure and how points for academics and behavior are obtained By February 2019, - Two inter-school visits will have been conducted, Round 1 of the Leadership and Legacy Program will be completed, Fall CHAMPS program will be completed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s Strengths: In 2017-18, teachers in K-3 worked with Universal Literacy Coach and Early Reading Matters Coach to solidify Guided Literacy practices during the 10:10:10 reading block. Team leaders attended professional learning at Teaching Matters during the year to deepen their pedagogical practice. The work of teacher teams has been instrumental in moving the instructional agenda at P.S. 87 using a distributive leadership structure. Teacher leaders facilitate collaborative inquiry cycles for their grades aligned to school wide instructional priorities and meet weekly as a leadership team (administrators and teacher leaders) to share noticings, analyze data, and identify the most impactful instructional strategies. As a result, teachers share in decision making, learn from one another, establish instructional coherence across the school and support measurable improvement in student learning. Teacher Teams using an Inquiry Approach to the analysis of reading data led to the increase in ELA scores overall by 7%, an increase of 12% in Grade 3 and 13% in Grade 5. School’s Needs: a) Deepen the work in each grade level to increase the engagement of boys in literacy with a focus in Grade K-2. b) Increase instruction in word solving strategies C) Provide Early Interventions in reading for students in Grades 1-2. d) Disaggregate Reading Data of boys in 12:1:1 and ICT Special Education Classes e) Focus on attendance for students who are in Grade 2. These students had very poor attendance when they were in Grade 1. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 4  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of grades K-3 teachers will be engaged in Year 2 of a three year targeted professional learning grant through the Teaching Matters Early Reading Matters initiative that develops reading instructional competencies of K-3 teachers to improve reading instruction. The (EOY) Fountas an Pinnell reading levels for Grade 2 students will increase from 36% in the 2017-18 school year while students were in Grade 1 to 56%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Early Reading Matters (ERM) coach will support teacher pedagogy for 30 days through evidenced-based practices aligned to early literacy instruction targeted to student's needs through 10:10:10, guided literacy, phonics, intervention programs and using the Reading Behaviors Tool to plan instruction. Provide intervention supports to students in Grade 1 who were holdovers and struggling students in Grade 2 with particular attention to boys, Students with Disabilities and English as a New Language Learners. Teachers September 2018 to May 2019 Three teachers will attend 3 days of professional development with Early Reading Matters All Teachers Sept. 2019 - Cabinet June 2019 Early Reading Matters Coach Universal Literacy Coach Cabinet Early Reading Matters Coach Universal Literacy Coach ESL Teacher Provide time for Teacher Teams to meet weekly. All Teachers September Cabinet Track daily and weekly attendance of "at risk" students identified in 2017-18. Students 2018 to May 2019 dd October 2018 to June 2019 Cabinet Universal Literacy Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers, Parent Coordinator and Universal Literacy Coach will collaborate on providing workshops on early reading strategies for parents. Parent Coordinator will support teachers in encouraging attendance of targeted students 6  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. *Per Diem teachers to support professional learning and inter-visitations for teachers *Per session for teachers *Title 1 Parent Fund Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will input monthly, Fountas and Pinnell reading levels in Googledocs. for analysis and intervention. By February 2019, the Mid-Year Fountas and Pinnel reading levels of Grade 2 students will indicate that 45% of students are reading on and above grade level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom observation data and Reading Behaviors Tool Inter-visitation schedules Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School’s Strengths: 1) Strong Teacher Teams and teacher leadership within each team. 2) Teachers meet weekly 3) Cabinet including Universal Literacy Coach meets weekly to analyze data and trends and set the agenda for the coming week ad E-Memo's sent by Principal outlining the focus for the week and the work ahead. 4) Changes in areas of supervision for Assistant Principal in K-2 to include Grade 3 to align the work of the K-3 Early Reading Matters grant and to provide a bridge from Grade 2 to the testing Grades. As a result of this decision, the number of students proficient in ELA in Grade 3 rose from 21% to 33% and in Math from 16% to 39%. School’s Needs: As referenced in Goal #1 under Rigorous instruction, Grade 5 will be de-compartmentalize in math and ELA. During the 2017-18 school year Grade 3 instructional program was supervised by the K-2 supervisor and school data specialist. The following needs were identified as students transitioned from Grade 2 to 3: 1) A need to revise the Math Block to include fluency standards for each grade and the flow of the math block 2) A need to closely track and monitor End of Chapter Test data to make timely adjustments 3) The need to research other supplemental materials such as EngageNY 4) A need to re-visit the Go Math program by using the Achieve the Core Go Math Guidance to identify gaps Part 2 – Annual Goal 8  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school wide Vertical Math Team will engage in a grade wide inquiry around mathematical practices and adaptation of the Go Math Curriculum to meet the needs of all students and to continue the momentum of achieved by Grade 3 students in the 2017-18 school year. As a result there will be an increase in the number of students in Grade 4 achieving proficiency from 39% to 50% as evidenced by the NYS Math test. 9 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers September Principal 2018 to October 2019 Assistant Principals Principal Assistant Principal Teacher Team Leaders Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School wide adoption of grade level fluency in math and restructuring of the Math Block Teacher Teams will monitor Go Math Chapter Test results from the scanned IO system and create "Walk In" Do Nows, Do Now's before the Go Math Lesson and weekly review during Formative Fridays to review skills identified by Go Math Chapter Tests and IReady Mid-Year data with particular to boys in Levels 1 and 2, Students with Disabilites and English as a New Language Learners. Teacher Team Leaders September 2018 to June 2019 All Teachers In Grade 4 and 5 provide time during the math block for students to use iReady for instruction at their level. Math Vertical Team maps out the fluency requirements for each grade Regularly scheduled individual meetings with teachers at strategic data points throughout the year to review student work and progress. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Cabinet How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator and teachers will engage families in a survey regarding access to a tablet or computer. The results of the survey will be used to determine which students have priority access to laptops during the school day. 0  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Diem to support Teacher Team Meetings and District professional learning Per Session for teachers and administrators to review supplemental materials in math Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, the Predicted Performance of Grade 4 students will be 45%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady BOY, MOY and EOY data Go Math Chapter Test data in IO and Googledocs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School's Strengths: Creating a meaningful family involvement strategy that includes fathers is a important to the success of our students. P.S. 87 has been successful in creating community building activities throughout the year to enrich the civic life of the school through its strong visual arts and music programming (including our music collaboration with One World Middle School) and many enrichment clubs within our school. In the 2017-18 Learning Environment Survey 89% of parents responded positively to engagement and strong family ties and 87% of parents responded that there is strong outreach and involvement. Next Steps: 1) Engage families in a dialogue regarding the social and emotional development of boys based on our Equity Focus 2) Reading data shows that in Grade K, 1 and 2 students who are performing one or two levels below in reading have poor attendance Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the June 2019, the attendance of students in Grades 1 will increase from 90.1% when they were in kindergarten to 92.8% and the attendance of Grade 2 students will increase from 90.9% when they were in Grade 2 in 2017-18 to 94.3%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Use the Early Reading Matters reading tracker to identify students in Grades K-2 with chronic absences monthly Parents Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor will target students to meet with for "check in/check out" Cross reference list of students with chronic absences with Students in Temporary Housing Parents Send out "Attendance Improvement Letters" Monthly from September 2018 to May 2019 Monthly Sept. to October 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator Teachers Guidance Counselor Teachers Parent Coordinator Provide outreach to parents, through workshops with District Attendance Teacher Parents Sept. 18 to June 19 Parent Coordinator Prepare Attendance Policy and develop House system with points for regular attendance Parents and Students Guidance Counselor District Attendance Teacher October 2018-June 2019 Attendance Committee Equity and Excellence Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Partnerships with Studio in a School, Music for Many, My Education Group (Mychineseteacher.com) and Education Through Music including family workshops and engagement through several school wide performances throughout the year. The Parent Coordinator and Cabinet are responsible for implementation and oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 3  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Supplies and materials for workshops outreach and activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the attendance of Grade 1 students will improve by 1.4% and Grade 2 students by 1.7%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Attendance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-5 English language arts (ELA) Students in K-2 performing below grade level on the Fountasand PinnnelReading Test Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1.Computer Software: Imagine Learning: English Language Learners and students with IEP’s 1. Independent work with interactive software During the school day-45minutes, 4 times a week 2. Independent and small group instruction 2. After school 2.5 hours a week 2 times a week 2. Repeated reading of leveled books 3. Individual andSmall Group 3.During School – 10 minutes 2x per week 3.Sight words, phonics, and high frequency words, repeated readings 4.Short passages, close reading, guided reading, writing 5. READ Program -Grade 1 students 4.Small Group instruction 1:1 Small Group 6..After School Program: Grades 3-5 Level 1 4.During school 15 minute 1.1 two times per week and 30 minutes small group two times per week 5.After school 1.5 hours 2 times per week 5  Mathematics 7.Saturday Academy Grades 3-5 Level 2 and Low Level 3 All students performing below the median scale score between a level 2/partially proficient and a Level 3/proficient on a grade 3-5 NYS Math exam. Students in K-2 performing below grade level on the Go Math Chapter benchmark tests 1.Go Math supplemental programs with hands on activities 2.Multi-step word problems 3..After School Program: Grades 3-5 Level 1 students 4. Saturday Academy Grades 3-5 Level 2 students 1.Small Group 2. Small Group 3.Small Group 4. Small Group Science Science End of Unit Tests Review of tests Social Studies Social Studies End of Unit Tests Review of Tests Small group instruction Small group instruction Teacher or parent referrals At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) “At Risk Counseling One on one 6. Weekdays 1.5 hours 2x a week 7. Saturdays 2.5 hours once per week After school 1.5 hours 2 times per week Saturdays 2.5 hours per week During the school day as determined by the teacher During the day and determined by the teacher During the day determined by the provider 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, there are 60 students in Temporary Housing . 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in Temporary Housing will be provided with the following: 1) A school backpack with supplies that they need for the school year. 2) Academic support within the school and and after school in various programs such as READ in Grade 1 and the After School and Saturday Academies 3) "At risk" counseling as needed 4) Enrollment in enrichment activities provided by the school 5) Access to digital texts and online learning during the school day and after school 6) Assistance with urgent needs provided by school social worker and guidance counselor Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. All teachers are highly qualified. Teachers are provided with ongoing professional development during the school day and during the summer on-site and also Citywide. New teachers are mentored for one year by a teacher on their grade. Check points are provided during the school year with new teachers and administration. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Universal Literacy Coach Initiative Early Reading Matters Initiative from Teaching Matters District Professional Learning Algebra for All Show What You Know – Teachers providing professional development to their colleagues including grade inter-visitations Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 9  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Yearly tours for local preschool students are conducted by the Parent Coordinator. The Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor also make on-site presentations. An orientation is held in June for all parents of incoming Kindergarten students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Instructional Team, made up of a representative from each grade, makes decisions regarding the selections of appropriate assessments and professional development needed at the weekly meetings. Teacher Teams meet twice a week to analyze data and make adjustments to curriculum and instruction. Twice a year, teachers are given a survey of their professional development needs to complete. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 500490 x 0 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 17,22,27,34  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Local 58908 0 0 3652539 x 0 0 x Reduced class size 0 0 17,22,27,34 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-1  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS87], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 87 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, science and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ●maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ●conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ●provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ●host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 4  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA ●schedule additional parent meetings during Tuesday Parent Engagement Time, mornings and evenings, , to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions through PTA Parent Survey and Feedback Forms; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent- Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events such as Curriculum Night, Art Exhibitions, Breakfast with the Orchestra and OctoberFest; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written, digital and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter that is also posted on the school's website designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing backpacked letters and folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. P.S. 87 School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 87, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this 5  Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education) Act (ESSA; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 6  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 7  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; * supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as needed Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 8  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name PS 87 Borough Bronx School Number 087 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Donna Anaman Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Tania Lopes Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area Sara Derenzis Related-Service Provider James Perry Superintendent Meisha Ross-Porter Assistant Principal Loydie Vertus Coach N/A School Counselor Milady Samboy Parent Jessica Paballon Parent Coordinator Susan Garcia Field Support Center Staff Member Anne Roberts(ARoberts13) Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 624 0 Total number of ELLs 15 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.40%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Fountas and Pinnell and I-Ready as the assessment tool for assessing the early literacy skills of our English Language Learners. Fountas and Pinnell tells us students' instructional reading levels in English. The I-ready gives us a diagnostic report on how students are doing phonetically, grammar and their reading comprehension. Both assessments allows us to determine where to begin instructionally. The data helps us to plan using the appropriate approach, strategy, or program. . We currently do not have a bilingual program and our ELL population is relatively small. We do utilize monolingual classes and supplement instruction with our standalone ENL program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We use guided reading, 10-10-10, partner reading, read alouds, vocabulary development, and comprehension development through close reading, a myriad of vocabulary strategies, and text-dependent questions. 1  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The assessments that are used to identify students strengths and weaknesses are chapter tests, end of unit tests, and MOSL Performance Tasks in Writing. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the data has been gathered teachers can group students and modify their instruction to meet the needs of the students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] A Response to Intervention Framework is utilzed to support our ELLs. We offer a strong a Tier 1 academic program, offer targeted additional supports for some of our studetns at the tier 2 level, and a few students require more rigorous, targeted intervention at the Tier 3 level. Many of our ELLs are pulled out for small group instruction by our AIS (Academic Intervention Services) teacher. She follows the framework for grades K-5 to ensure that our ELLs second language development is considered in instructional decisions. Teachers are trained to use ESL methodologies in their classes to support their teaching. For example, the use of visuals, computers, videos, manipulatives, role playing, language dictionaries, partners with peers that speak the same home language, etc. Our Common Core Aligned ELA and Math curriuculum provide ongoing assessment opportunities along with our computer based assessments. Fountas and Pinnell benchmark asssessment is used to determine Tier 2 and 3 targeted interventions. Imagine Learning, a language and literacy software for ELLs, is used by our students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The outcome assessments that are used are the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, and the ELA and Math State Exams. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Adjustments are made by grouping the students based on their needs and their proficiency levels. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. A. We offer a Stand Alone and Integrated ENL model. The Stand Alone program is provided outside of the classroom by grouping students be their proficiency levels. Students work in small groups using visuals and TPR. The Integrated model is provided in the classroom during ELA instruction. Students work with the ENL provider to scaffold the lesson being taught. B. The program model is heterogeneous (mixed proficiency levels) one. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering ELLs receive 180 minutes of Stand Alone and 180 minutes of Integrated services Emerging ELLs receive 90 minutes of Stand Alone and 180 minutes of Integrated services.. Transitioning ELLs receive 90 minutes of Stand Alone and 90 minutes of Integrated services. Expanding ELLs receive 180 minutes of Integrated service. Commanding ELLs receive 90 minutes of Integrated for an additional two years 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development is varied. Instructional approaches allow multiple entry points to meet the needs of diverse learners. Students have the opportunity to be in a small group, and to work in pairs. Our Go Math and ReadyGen Math and ELA curriculum are Common Core aligned and include differentiated strategies for ELLs. Various differentiation strategies are used such as technology (desktop computers and laptops) visuals, books, dictionaries, art, gym, music, trips, assemblies, school orchestra, dance, Total Physical Response (TPR), Cognitive Academic Language Approach (CALLA) and language experience (LEA). The ELA teacher and the classroom teacher work together for the success of our ELL's. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that all students are evaluated in their home languages throughout the year using formative assessments in their language such as the GO Math chapter tests,Beginning of the Year, Middle of the Year and End of the Year benchmarks. As well as the Imagine Learning assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status All ELL ability levels are offered the full range of academic supports that are provided in our school such as RTI during the school dday, Extended Day 2x a week, Saturday Academy, After School and the READ 1:1 tutoring for first grade students. Students who are Entering are placed in a classroom where there is a student who speaks the same home language to support their adjustment to school. Differentiation for ALL ELL abilities is supported by Imagine Learning, an online ELA program that is offered in 15 languages. Students also may be provided with the same reading passage but a varying reading levels for support. A staff member who speaks the same home language is also identified to "check in" and "check out with the student daily. Through periodic assessments in ELA, students are monitored and paired with the Academic Interventions that meet their needs whether 1:1 or small group. ELLs continue to receive support by the ESL teacher after reaching the Commnading stage and continue to receive services and testing accommodations for up to two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our school uses ReadyGen for English Language Arts instruction K-5. Teachers plan weekly with coaches and consultants to "unpack" this program to make sure it is meeting the needs of our ELL-SWDs. It is a rigorous program providing tiered support and strong vocabulary development. Students are also supported during small group instruction for pre-teachng or re-teaching, charts, graphic organizers and computer based programs such as Imagine Learning, MyOn and I-ready. Students are exposed to stories and academic content through the use of multi-media. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 3  Our school offers a diverse model of support for ELL-SWDs from pull out SETTS, push in SETTS, ICT classes, mainstreaming to 12:1:1 environments. The LPT determines the least restrictive environment for ELL-SWDs based on the students' needs and IEP goals. An ICT class and 12:1:1 class is offered on each grade. The team determines the best placement for the success of the student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ENL students who are identified as SIFE, newcomers, or who are in need of extra support, are provided additional remediation through our Extended Day program, After-School, and Saturday Academy program that focuses on building literacy and math skills to prepare students for the Common Core aligned State assessments. Sessions are held in small groups of 10 students who are strategically grouped based on needs that have been identified through the use of data. Students in Grades 3 and 4 receive two periods of "hands on" science in the Science Lab in addition to three periods of Science with the classroom teacher. Students are engaged in content area reading in designated periods for social studies but are also engaged in content area reading during the literacy block. Non-fiction books are also used in small group guided reading instruction in the classroom. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? All ELL families will be supported by a series of workshops provided by the Parent Coordinator and the ENL teacher on the different reading programs that support English Language development during the designated Parent Engagement period of the week. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time, none of our programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are an integral part of the school community and are included in all programs. These programs include residencies in theatre and dance, trips, chorus, and performances. There are many classroom and school-wide celebrations that include attendance celebrations, book celebrations, book fairs, orchestra, assemblies, and the Science Expo. Parents of ELL's have access to translators during Parent Teachers Conferences and as needed to communicate with pedagogue and staff members. Other types of programs in our school community include extended day afternoon intervention programs, and Saturday Academy. The goal of the afterschool programs is to have the children progress to the next language proficiency level and be able to perform at a proficient level on standardized assessments. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms have smartboards and laptops to enable differentiated learning. All classrooms have access to the technology lab once a week. Students have access to I-Ready, MyON, Imagine Learning and Great Leaps intervention programs. In the content area of Science, our school follows the NYC DOE Scope and Sequence and our focus on hands-on experimental learning. Students are exposed to inquiry and all ELL's participate in the school wide annual Science Expo. In the content area of Mathematics, the school follows the standards of the CCLS and uses the program GO Math. In addition, all ELL's participate in the arts through our various residency programs and with our Art teacher. Technlogy is woven into our school culture. Our ELL's have equal access to these resources. Every classroom has acess to a lap top cart and desktops and all classrooms have smartboards that are used on a daily basis to provide an interactive learning environment. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The only native language support provided is the use of peers with the same native language. There are staff in our school speak both Spanish and French. Students are supported through the use of bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, etc. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 4  Access to resources is school wide. Support and resources are tailored to meet the needs of ELL's developmental ages and grade levels. The required services support the ELL's ages and grade levels. As stated earlier, the students are grouped based on grade level and language proficiency. Resources are tailored to meet the needs of the ELL's ages and grade levels. Materials used by the classroom teachers and the ENL teacher are age and grade appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At present, there are no activities offered to newly enrolled ELLs during the summer due to our very small population. However, once enrolled ELL students and families are welcomed to our school and participate in the rich academic and social/emotional programs offered at P.S. 87. Before the beginning of the year all Kindergarten parents are invited to a Kindergarten orientation. During Kindergarten screening, the ENL coordinator is present to assist children and their parents with the process. Our parent coordinator reaches out to provide services as needed. As students are registered in the building throughout the school year, the ENL coordinator meets the parents and explains the identification process as well as the programs that offered here at the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher attends workshops and training to keep abreast of new policies, materials and strategies to support our ELL population of students. Educational consultants also offer their services and training on different topics pertaining to our instructional program. These strategies include modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text representation, and metacognition. The professional development that has been offered from September 2014 to June 2015 includes the following: ReadyGen and Go Math curriculum support and adjustment to meet the needs of diverse learners Sample templates that are aligned to Universal Design for Learning Differentiation for ELLs and Special Education (Interventions/Extensions based on data) Small group expectations and possibilities Setting up rotations for Guided Reading Data Analysis of formative and summative assessments Create goals for groups of student Imagine Learning Program 5  Using data to drive instruction To assist ELLs as they transition from the elementary school to middle school, we offer the services of our Student Council, Guidance Counselor for advice, tours of new schools at the end of the year and are informed of support services in their new schools. The ESL teacher and one classroom teacher attends periodic training offered by Fordham University and Borough Support Centers. Planning Professional Development for the the 2015-16 school year includes: - The Development of Academic Language - - Vocabulary Development Professional development is offered to teachers through special meetings /workshops, in house learning on different topics throughout the year in ReadyGen, Go Math, Social Studies and Math aligned to the Common Core. Teachers are also sent to off-site workshops offered by the Borough Center or Central. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To make the transition from elementary school to middle school easier our Guidance Counselor, Social Worker meet with our ELLs for orientation and support sessions. Mondays from 2:35 p.m. to 3:55 p.m. and Tuesdays from 3:20 p.m. to 3:50 p.m. are designated times for school wide professional learning. In addition, all grade levels meet once a week for common grade meetings. With the support of the new Borough based support services, the anticipation is that there will be support to schools under this new structure for professional learning opportunities focusing on the needs of ELL's. The Teaching Matters ELA and Generation Ready consultant provides support in ELA with scaffolds for ELLs. Agenda's and sign in sheets are retained for all professional development that is offered within the school. Teachers attending off-site professional development turnkey their learning to the rest of the staff. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During Parent Engagement Time, the ENL teacher meets with parents to discuss the students' language proficiency results and progress. Translation is provided for parents based on parent need. Records for annual individual meetings, phone calls with ELL parents and outreach are kept by staff in a log. Agendas and sign in sheets are used for group meetings. Tuesday from 2:35 p.m. to 3:20 p.m. are designated Parent Engagement Time for all staff to reach out to parents as needed. Also, their is annual Parent Meeting aside from the Parent Teacher Conferences between the ENL teacher and the parents to discuss students progress. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement is very important to our school. There are many community events held throughout the school year for all parents. Bussing accommodations are made for ELL parents to attend workshops at Fordham University. In addition to activities related to curriculum and instruction, P.S. 87 offers many community building events for families. This includes Octoberfest, Breakfast with the Orchestra, Art Exhibit, Track and Field and School Chorus and Dance. Fathers are especially welcomed at our Fatherhood in the 21 st Century Breakfasts and trips to the Science Museum with their children. The Parent Coordinator's role is to assist all parents including ELLs and SWD's with support in adjusting and thriving in our school. Also, she ensures that all teachers and staff receive a copy of the "I Speak" card which includes the phone numbers for over the phone interpretation. 6  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Donna Anaman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 87 School DBN: 11X087 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Donna Anaman Title Principal Loydie Vertus Assistant Principal Susan Garcia Tania Lopes Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jessica Paballon Parent Sara Derenzis Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Milady Samboy School Counselor Meisha Ross Porter Ann Roberts Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/30/15 10/30/15 10/30/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X087 School Name: PS87 Superintendent: M. Ross Porter The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Susan Tanya Garcia Lopes Parent Coordinator YES ESL Teacher NOT Yet YES NO * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To ensure that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in the main language they understand, PS 87 reviews their HLIS to assess their oral and written language preferences. Most of the information sent out are already translated from Central. Reports from ATS regarding the preferred language of parent (RAPL and UPPG), information on the Blue Card, Parent and Teacher Surveys are also used. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English, Spanish Arabic Bengali 801 25 10 2 95.47 2.98 1.19 .24 English 27 10 2 95.23 3.22 1.19 .24 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. ENGLISH Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Standard communications are on the DOE website General School Letters that are sent out to the school community Back pack letters ELL Orientation in September Internet translation After School and Saturday Academy Use of Translation Unit when necessary three weeks before event Phone- in Translation Unit After-school program information As they become available When the Translation and Interpretation Unit, a school, or office is temporarily unable to provide required translation a written notice on the face of the English document will indicate how a parent can request free translation or interpretation of the document. School Calendars Monthly In house translation 1  NYS Testing Dates N/A September N/A In house translation N/A 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? In house staff will be used for Spanish and Arabic translations Four Parent Teacher Conferences per year September - Get Acquainted PTC - 2 Translation Telephone Service Use of Translation Unit when necessary Student Led Conferences Phone calls during Parent Engagement As needed Individual Meetings scheduled when necessary As needed Language Line is a 24/7 service that helps to communicate with families in over 200 languages. In house staff will be used for Spanish and Arabic translations In house staff will be used for Spanish and Arabic translations Language Line is a 24/7 service that helps to communicate with families in over 200 languages. N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger has a text feature that sends messages in the student's home language. 2  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Parent Coordinator will meet with teachers and all school staff to review specifically Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and provide access information to Language and Interpretation services and resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will use all the ways listed above to provide information to parents regarding language assistance access. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback from parents will be gathered through parent surveys personal communication through meetings scheduled by the Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher. 3 
