 11X153 School Name: P.S. 153 HELEN KELLER Principal: MEGHAN KELLEY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS 153 The Helen Keller School 11X153 11X153 pre-K-5 School Number (DBN): 650 Baychester Avenue, Bronx, New York 10475 718-904-5550 Phone Number: 718-904-5564 Fax: Ronald Hartridge rhartridge@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Meghan E. Kelley Anell Veras Jessica Casiano Anell Veras N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 11 Dr. Jeremy Kabinoff Superintendent: 2750 Throop Avenue, Bronx, New York 10469 Superintendent’s Office Address: jkabino@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2620 Phone Number: 718-519-2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, New York 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-4118 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Meghan Kelley Anell Veras Jessica Casiano Jennifer Flinn-Knizeski DaniellaBellizzi LatechiaReddick *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ChristineMayne KimberlyWoodruff Veronica Maldonado Joanna Rhoden-Plaza Debbie McRae Nicola DakinsWilliams Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The Helen Keller School Community’s mission is that we are committed to creating a climate which promotes achievement of high academic standards and the pursuits of excellence. Our risk-free learning environment will ensure that all children will be motivated to face the challenges of the new millennium and become independent, critical thinkers, problem solvers and lifelong learners. They will learn to be caring individuals that develop an   appreciation and respect for cultural diversity. Through cooperation and participation of both our parents and the school community, our children will become productive citizens and leaders of tomorrow. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 153 The Helen Keller School is an elementary school located on the Truman educational complex in Co-Op City. The school, located in the Northeast Bronx, serves approximately 640 students, who are either zoned to the school or are offered seats based on availability into the Gifted and Talented program. The Helen Keller school has had a rich history of academic excellence. The school’s NYS assessment results exceed both the district and Citywide averages. In addition to a Gifted and Talented program, the school has a partnership with a District 75 program, located in the building. There is also an after school partnership, Young Achievers, provided through Montefiore which is also hosted on the premises. As a staff, we have worked tirelessly to deepen our instructional focus, refine our curriculum in a variety of ways, while developing our professional learning to improve our practices and ensure rigourous instruction. These include refining our "I can" statements in student-friendly language, development of common student portfolios that follow students to the next grade, sample anchor charts and revisions of units based on Grade Team feedback, a focus on teaching reading in small groups, using guided reading lessons, and strategy lessons, and the embedding of Thinking Maps. We have also restructured our Reading Workshop to include small group instruction and differentiation based on the needs of individual students. Teachers work in a number of teams, increasing collaboration and teacher leadership. Our Curriculum Mapping Team has been instrumental in making curricular modifications, increasing the rigor of our units of study, and has promoted collaboration across grades. In addition, our Grade Leaders team set the foundation for building teacher leadership and strengthening our vertical alignment as they worked to lead each grade team focusing on planning cycles and lesson study. Grade Leaders also further developed their roles within the school, and are instrumental in advising on the school-wide grading policy, progress report revisions, and development of the mandatory summer assignment. Furthermore, Grade Leaders have engaged in professional learning to further build their leadership capacity, especially through the inter-visitation protocol. The Professional Learning Committee develops cycles of learning and refines the plan throughout the year to ensure that teachers are fully supported and working in collaborative teams. Specifically, we have been trained in Mindfulness practices, Thinking Maps and small group reading instruction. Our Data Team works to analyze school wide trends and create summary statements that drive adjustments to our instructional practices. During the 2016-17 school year, Assistant Principals created AP Cabinet, comprised of a diverse team of teacher leaders who serve as thought partners and to create a space to address complex instructional challenges. PS 153 has established a number of partnerships that provide additional access to the arts including Bronx Opera, Bronx Arts Ensemble, and Inside Broadway. Bronx Opera provides students with the opportunity to interact with the theater, where actors visit the school pre and post opera, and students have the opportunity to attend multiple Operas as fourth and fifth graders. Through Bronx Arts Ensemble students in the fourth and fifth grade are provided with instrument instruction to participate in the band and African drumming groups. This builds on the K-2 music curriculum which focuses on keyboarding, and the third grade which focuses on recorder. Inside Broadway is sustained through a generous grant, providing exposure to theater careers and the development and culminating performance by students. Through a generous grant, we are in the first year of a partnership with Early Reading Matters. This will provide our school with tailored on-site support to continue to build on our successes in reading instruction. In addition, teacher leaders will be supported with professional learning opportunities provided through the grant. This will work in 0  conjunction with the support provided by a part time Universal Literacy Coach (provided and assigned by the District), as well as the work of one Model Teacher. PS 153 firmly believes in the importance of community service, teaching our students that even though they are young, they have the power to make a difference. Each October our school turns "pink" to support the American Cancer Society in the Bronx. The students also participate in Penny Harvest, as well as a number of school based community service projects. In fifth grade students apply to participate in the community service initiative, which culminates in a special graduation designation and honor. To successful complete this project, fifth grade students must exemplify our citizenship standards and successfully complete forty hours of school based community service. Community Service projects include but are not limited to Pink Ambassadors, Color Guard, Usher Corps, Technology Assistant, Classroom Helper, Library Assistant, Young Men's Leadership, and Peace Patrol. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. There is one Gifted and Talented class in K and two Gifted and Talented classes in grades 1-5 (39%). Approximately 12% of our student population receives special education services, and 2% receives ENL services. We have also expanded our program to include pre-kindergarten, which is in its third year. In all areas of the pre-K assessment, the school scored above the Citywide average. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to build on previous successes, and our key areas will focus on rigorous instruction within the Framework. Our goals, focus on further developing our students as readers and thinkers, which is embodied in our instructional focus rooted in student engagement. We must substantially increase the numbers of students who are reading at or above grade level. If students are reading on grade level they will be more equipped to access the curriculum across all content areas. In addition, we will continue to participate in two pilots: Algebra for All and Thinking Maps. During the past year we have seen the tremendous impact of the training provided by Algebra for All, as well as the modifications made to our mathematics curriculum. Furthermore, the philosophy of A4A better equips our fifth grade students for middle school, while providing for a deeper understanding of mathematical content. Through additional school based training the A4A work has begun to take root vertical across the school. Specially, this is evidence in the common practice of Sprints and Number Talks. We will also build on our knowledge of Thinking Maps, and begin to shift from learning to map to mapping to learn. The Maps provide a language of eight visual patterns, each based on a fundamental thinking process. Grade teams have identified cognitive vocabulary aligned to each of the maps, and vocabulary builds vertically across the school. To support all teachers, we are engaging in a school wide mini roll-out beginning the first week in October. Finally, we will continue to support the development of the whole child, with a focus on our Bucket Filling philosophy, personal behavior matrix "DROPS," and through opportunities for school based community service. New during the 2018-2019 school year are the use of two daily school-wide meditations, as well as a common weekly affirmation that is restated each morning. Students are also working towards supplemental rewards such as additional recess time as incentives. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X153 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 649 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 42 42 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 9 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 65.0% % Attendance Rate 54.7% % Reduced Lunch 2.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 24.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.08 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 61.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 95% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 49 46 95.2% 9.7% 11.9% 58.1% 11.4% 1.8% 4 4% 8.5 55.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the Summer of 2016 our school began our journey as an Algebra for All School under the Mayor's Equity and Excellence for All initiative. Our school was accepted into A4A and committed to train our teachers in the the philosophy that placed an emphasis on deep understanding of content knowledge in order to build conceptual understanding. As a cohort one A4A school, two teachers were trained in the summer of 2016, two additional teachers were trained in the summer of 2017, and seven additional teachers trained in the summer of 2018. A4A required that we departmentalized our fifth grade beginning in the fall of 2016 which has allowed our teachers to strengthen their content knowledge while also preparing students for the middle school model. We have seen a 5% gain over the course of the past five years. For the past two years we have applied for and received the A4A Plus grant, which has provided funding for a consultant to support the curricular and instructional changes. In the Spring of 2018, all grades had the opportunity to work with the consultant on building Math Routines, specifically Sprints to build fluency and Number Talk, as well as Math Games. Furthermore, time was set aside to revise and modify the pacing of units throughout the school year. Our priority is to build student engagement while increasing student confidence in orchestrating mathematical discussions in order to strengthen their mathematical understanding and ability to engage in complex math tasks using a variety of problem solving skills and strategies. During the 2018-2019 we have submitted our applications for math coaching through A4A, as well as an A4A grant proposal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, 62% of students will be on or above grade level as measured by the NYS Mathematics Exam. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Develop a school wide Professional Learning Plan that provides opportunities for teachers to meet during their Teacher Team Time or Monday Professional Learning to engage in Data Talks, and discuss the successes and challenges of Number Routines. The Professional Learning Plan will also provide opportunities to strengthen teachers' math content knowledge. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Summer 2018 Professional Learning Committee, School Leaders, Teachers Two times per month September -June September-June Summer - June 2018 Teachers Data Team AP Cabinet Grade Leaders Teachers Support from A4A trained teachers and consultant and Thinking Maps Trainers Address what is not being mastered through Number Routines (Sprints and Math Talk), and access to First in Math. Engage in a thorough analysis of the June Instructional Reports to identify strengths and areas for growth across the school. Students Teachers Embed questions within math units that include the cognitive vocabulary. This will promote the use of Thinking Maps and can build students' confidence by using the same visual language across content areas. Students November-June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade Teams will share strategies that families can use at home which will be shared with each progress report and report card. Grade Teams will send home an overview of the curriculum in September. First in Math will be shared with families. 4  Initiate a Family Math Night to support families in accessing math in fun, creative ways to build math confidence of students and their families. It will engage parents in understanding how their children can enjoy and learn math both in school and at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday professional learning time Per session allocated for teachers and Supervisors to plan and implement a family math night Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 analyze the results from the mid-year Rally Math assessment. Ongoing progress monitoring can be done through unit assessments, Math Routines, and First in Math. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Rally Mathematics Assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? From the fall of 2014-June 2018 our school incorporated a character building curriculum, “Project Wisdom,” which complimented the school’s longstanding “Bucket Filling” philosophy. To that end we wanted to create an environment where we built personal habits that lay the foundation for the success of our students. We also created ways to celebrate and reinforce success and acts of kindness through the development of “Bucket Filler Bucks” which could be spent at our School Boutique, and regular celebrations such as our Bucket Filler of the Month ceremonies. During the 2015-2016 school year, staff and parents identified the characteristics that a PS 153 Graduate should embody. During that time, we identified specific behaviors that we will focus on within pre-k-1st grade, 2nd-3rd grade, and 4th-5th grade. As a result of this work, our staff also created a PBIS matrix “DROPS” to specifically name the personal behaviors that are expected in a variety of areas including the classroom, cafeteria, hallway, on trips, in the playground, etc. The acronym “DROPS” stands for Demonstrate Respect, Responsibility, Organization, Pride, and Success. Students fill buckets with “DROPS,” bringing deeper and more specific meaning to our Bucket Filling Philosophy. We also received and incorporated feedback from our families on both the DROPS matrix and personal behaviors that we will focus on within each grade span. In preparation for the 2018-2019 school year our school community recognized the need to shift our practice, and in response a Social Emotional Learning Team was created. The team worked during the summer of 2018 to identify monthly themes and books of the month (common across the school) that aligned to those themes. In addition, they made the recommendations such as incorporating two daily meditations, as well as positive affirmations. These practices work in conjunction with our Bucket Filling Philosophy, DROPS matrix and Characteristics. We also realized that our Boutique needs to have greater incentives, or more age appropriate incentives for our upper grade students. Our school community has a longstanding tradition of service to the community including raising funds for breast cancer, collecting food for the food drive, participating in Penny Harvest, engaging in a partnership with Rivers Run, and many others. Giving back to the community lays the foundation for students to see the amazing impact that they can have even at a young age. To further develop this awareness, a special graduation honor was developed for 5th grade students successfully completing 40 hours of Principal approved community service. During the first year (2016-2017) 40 students of the graduating class earned this honor, and our school community seeks to increase the number of students engaged in this experience. During the second year (2017-2018) 86 students of the graduating class earned this honor, more than doubling successful participation from the prior year. In the 2018-2019 school year, we continue to encourage students to participate in community service activities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 6  By June 2019 increase the positive climate across the school by supporting the development of students' personal behaviors, as measured by a decrease in the number of incidents in OORS by month when compared to the same month during the 2017-2018 school year. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The community service honor will be well advertised to students and families through the App, website, and during Back to School Night. Families will be encouraged to have students complete and submit their application which is due in September. Students October-May School Leaders, Faculty Advisers Engage in the entire school community in two meditations per day. The first meditation will follow morning announcements and the second meditation will follow the last lunch period. Students Staff September-June SEL Team Guidance SAPIS Teachers will incorporate multiple movement breaks throughout the day, drawing on techniques from Mindfulness and/or Move to Improve. Second Step Curriculum used by SAPIS to partner with classroom teachers on character education. SEL team will identify Book Club Books aligned to monthly themes. SAPIS worker, Guidance Counselor, and Dean of Students will team with teachers in the fall to facilitate lessons focusing on DROPS and character education (lessons will focus on trustworthy, respect, responsibility, fairness, caring, citizenship, service to community). Lessons and grade assemblies will continue at strategic points in the year. At the heart of PS 153's supportive environment is the bucket filling philosophy and DROPS matrix. Bucket Filler Bucks will be distributed to students to reinforce academic and personal habits. Bucket Filler Bucks can be saved and spent at our 153 Boutique. Additional upper grade incentives will be developed including movie tickets, tech time, extra recess, game sessions, and additional art period. Boutique dates will be well advertised for the duration of the school year. Students November-June SAPIS, Guidance Counselor, Dean of Students Students September-June Guidance Counselor, Dean, Teachers 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Share grade span behavior/habits in Parent and Student Handbook. Note that there is a DROPS contract/parent signature required for the Parent and Student Handbook. Hard copies of the Handbook are sent home in September and are available on the website and App. Explicitly share behaviors/habits during Back to School Night. Advertise the community service initiaves early in the fall, and engage families in conversations regarding the importance of community service. Create a Tree Map of all students participating in the community service initiative on a bulletin board on the first floor that is visible to families. Share the Tree Map in the December Parent Connection. Encourage families to display their child's community service assignment letter at home. Continue to engage families through a variety of forums including workshops, Coffee with the Principal and Parent Coordinator, and information sessions specific to the SEL program. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds allocated for Book Club Books that are aligned to monthly themes. Funds allocated for Boutique items Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 evaluate the number of OORs incidents for each month when compared to the corresponding months during the previous school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORs data which captures all school related incidents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school believes in the power of collaborative teachers in shared decision making. With the support of the Professional Learning Committee, teachers across the school, representing key stakeholders, ensure teacher voice is embodied in decisions made regarding professional learning and to create a sense of shared responsibility. The Learning Plan will also include opportunities to increase the effectiveness of teacher teams. Teacher Teams are essential in improving teacher practices and student outcomes, and is the most meaningful support for teacher development. Therefore, time during Monday Professional Development sessions, as well as during Teacher Team Time (one period per week), teachers will have the opportunity to engage in inquiry to empower teachers to make instructional decisions that increase overall student achievement. With this collaboration, since September 2017 in Kindergarten there has been a 36% increase of students reading on grade level, 30% increase of students reading on grade level in Grade 1, and 16% increase of students on reading level in Grade 2. According to the New York State assessments, there has been a 22% increase of students scoring on or above grade level on the ELA Exam in grades 3-5 since 2015. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, 70% of students will be reading on grade level as measured by Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our Professional Learning Plan will provide opportunities to grow teacher leaders across the school in order to create a sense of shared responsibility. The Learning Plan will also include opportunities to increase exposure to the Next Generation Learning Standards and optional opportunities including Book Study. Teachers will also be encouraged to join the Teacher's Guild in order to build a culture that is rooted in Design Thinking and teacher created solutions. Professional Learning will also support the refinement of teaching Reading in Small Groups. More specifically, Guided Reading/Level Up Groups, Strategy Groups, Book Clubs, and Stamina & Engagement during Independent Reading. The support trust and the independence of teams, school leaders will support the development of leadership practices within each team, creating a shared sense of responsibility. Teacher teams are encouraged to focus on both literacy and mathematics Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers September-June Professional Learning Committee School Leaders Teacher Leaders ULIT Coach Early Reading Matters Coach Through the Early Reading Matters grant all teachers will be supported in Shared Reading practices. Teachers, Students September-June Early Reading Matters Coach Implementation of easyCMB as a Universal Screener All Kindergarten and first grade teachers will be trained and will implement Fundations School Leaders, Grade Leaders, 2 All teachers in grades 3-5 will use Rally materials as a formative assessment. Teachers will analyze data to support informed instructional decisions. Extensive outreach and follow-up will be implemented in order to maintain high rates of student attendance. PS 153's attendance outreach will include phone calls home for each day of absence, personal phone call home on third day of unexplained absence, letters home, and home visits for extensive or unexplained absences. Chronic absenteeism will result in attendance meetings with school leaders. Students September-June Instructional Cabinet Members Attendance Committee, Attendance Teacher, School Leaders Submit Showcase School Application Teachers Spring 2019 Teacher Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Strategies that families can use at home will be shared with each progress report and report card. Grade Teams will send home an overview of the curriculum in September. Online resources will be shared with families on the school webpage and App (ongoing), including MyOn. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time scheduled for Teacher Team Time Time scheduled for Grade Leader meetings Time scheduled on Tuesdays for Special Education teachers to meet Time scheduled on Tuesdays for Gifted and Talented teachers to meet Per Diem for inter-visitations and Early Reading Matters off-site days for teachers Data Sheets (google) Early Reading Matters Grant provides for 30 on-site coaching days, as well as off-site learning for teacher leaders Per session for the development of the Showcase School application Funds for MyOn Funds for easyCBM Funds allocated for Rally assessments and instructional materials 3  Funds allocated for Fundations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, compare the percent of teachers scoring highly effective in component 1e for reading observations in the fall compared to reading observations in the spring. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advanced Data (component 1e) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We are in the second year of our Thinking Maps pilot, and the success of Thinking Maps hinges on Effective School Leadership, especially in the early phases of implementation. Success is also dependent on the Implementation Team (a group of teachers trained as trainers). In order to further support students’ ability to think through complex problems and to increase their confidence in persevering , Thinking Maps provides a language of eight visual patterns. Each map is based on a fundamental thinking process and supports students’ ability to think critically about complex problems. This, in turn, will be life-long skills to use in order to be successful in all areas of their academic and social lives. Thinking Maps are based on brain research, and much of the current research supports the belief that our ability to learn visually is greater than any of our other senses. In addition to the brain based research, incorporating Thinking Maps into our school has provided PS 153 with a common visual language in classrooms and across the school. During the past year our focus was on learning to map, however, in the 2018-2019 school year we will shift our focus to mapping to learn. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, apply and be awarded Level II accreditation as measured and reviewed by Thinking Maps, Inc. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop a small group of Student Trainers to support new students. Teachers Fall 2018 Thinking Maps Trainers Student Adviser School Leaders Teachers September-June School Community September-June Thinking Maps Trainers School Leaders will model the use of Thinking Maps when facilitating meetings and professional learning. Key school documents will be represented in the form of a map set. Two Thinking Maps Trainers will attend BFSC based learning opportunities that specifically support the community of Thinking Maps Schools across the Bronx and will share with the larger PS 153 school based Thinking Maps Trainer Team. Thinking Maps Trainers will provide guidance and recommendations of Level II accreditation. Thinking Maps Trainers will plan and support a school-wide Thinking Maps mini roll-out beginning in October, focusing on one map or frame per week. Thinking Maps trainers will be engaged in at least two walk-throughs and will create a memo to share outcomes with the larger staff. Trainers will also use walk-throughs to inform ongoing support to the larger staff. Cognitive vocabulary will be emphasized that is specific to each grade. Students September-June Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Thinking Maps parent workshops embedded throughout the year and facilitated by Teacher Trainers. Thinking Maps memos posted on App and Website (provides parents guidance on each of the eight maps). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for Thinking Maps manuals and materials for new teachers. Per session funding to support trainers/implementation team. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, our school will have completed Level II accreditation requirements, as well as a draft application for Level II accreditation, as measured by Thinking Maps Level II accreditation requirements. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Thinking Maps implementation guidelines and Level II Accreditation for leadership, teachers, students, and implementation team. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We seek to provide many opportunities and choice in terms of how families can become involved. PS 153 is celebrating the 10 year anniversary of the Fathers of Helen Keller, a prominent subgroup of the larger Parent Association. The annual Father's Bring Your Child to School event is a well attended event by members of our school community as well as the larger Co-Op City community. There are other thriving groups within the Parent Association including Nurturing Moms, Gifted and Talented, Language Access, and Special Needs. In addition, PS 153 benefits from an active Parent Association who continually partners with administration and teachers. In addition to Dad's Bring Your Child to School Day, the community looks forward to events such as our annual Multi-Cultural Night. We will continue to diversify communication through different platforms including newsletters, progress reports, report cards and through our app and website. We will also continue to provide training to parents through a variety of workshops. Recent feedback has also revealed that families would like additional support regarding the middle school application process, as well as opportunities to engage in school based events with their children. Based on this feedback, we will initiate additional middle school supports, as well as events that provide opportunities for families and children to engage together. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, embed at least three additional family activities with at least one hundred participants. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Parent Association Parent Coordinator, Grade Teams, Principal A variety of workshops will be provided including Common Sense Parenting, Middle School informational sessions, Thinking Maps, and Navigating private school applications. Families September-June Families September -June To support trust, we will communicate in a variety of formats. We will continue to use the school app, website, and phone messaging system. In addition, strategies to support academic achievement will be shared with each progress report and report card. The Parent Connection will continue to be sent home on the first Friday of each month. Families will also have the opportunity to attend Coffee with the Principal and Parent Coordinator. The PS 153 calendar will be shared with families in September. Build on our Science Fair concept to include other academic celebrations. This can include classroom based celebrations or school wide events such as a Spelling Bee, Student Government Elections, Art Show, and Math Bowl. Provide other family events such as fundraisers and game night. Continue revised format of final parent teacher conference as our Multicultural Event for families. Families May 2019 School leaders will work with the Parent Association to provide training for class parents. The class parent initiative will be launched in October (training for Class Parents in September). Parents Fall 2018 School Leaders, Teachers Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, School Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Publicize and encourage families to attend classroom celebration and school-wide events. 9  Participate in Open School Week. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tuesday Family Engagement time for meet and greet for class parents and teachers Tuesday Family Engagement time used to develop and complete Progress Reports Funding allocated for workshop materials Funding allocated for App development and fees, as well as Website. Per session for additional evening and/or Saturday families events Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019 analyze the attendance for Family Events Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance logs for events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Reading and writing assessments, including running records and writing tasks Mathematics Performance Tasks, skills assessment Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Unit Assessments, Science Labs Unit Assessments Teacher Observations Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Phonemic awareness; phonics; fluency; comprehension; writing. Programs include: Wilson Fundations, Great Leaps, Focus intervention program Computation; problem solving Programs include: Go Math interventions, Envision resources, Focus intervention program Integrated into literacy Integrated into literacy At risk services including play/talk therapy are provided by guidance Small group, pull out and push in During the school day, Spring Academy Small group, pull out and push in During the school day, Spring Academy Small group within the classroom Small group within the classroom Small group, one-to-one During the school day During the school day During the school day 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 30 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2 At risk guidance counseling Materials such as school supplies, and uniforms 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $2476. 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 4  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 5  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, and the Parent Association. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 7  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed. N/A Parental Involvement and School Quality The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams and Parent Association; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress. N/A School-Parent Compact (SPC) Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); 8  I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent and Student Handbook are provided to all families. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 9  Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 25 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child as well as the DROPS matrix; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property by practicing the Bucket Filling philosophy and DROPS matrix; 0  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Helen Keller School Borough Bronx School Number 153 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Meghan Kelley Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kim Maxwell Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal N/A Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent Jessica Casiano Parent Coordinator Ronald Hartridge Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) Meisha Ross-Porter C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 648 2 Total number of ELLs 15 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.31%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The results of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT are being used in instructional planning purposes for ELLs at P.S. 153. Examining these scores are essential for determining students' proficiency levels, and how to address their instructional needs. Administering the Spanish LAB to students of Spanish heritage provides better insight of students' L1 abilities. This will dictate whether native language support is necessary during instruction. Standarized test scores in ELA and Mathematics are considerable factors too which guide instructional planning. Prior to the administration of these New York State examinations, students engage in simulated testing sessions using Rally materials. They are designed to make students feel more comfortable with the testing process. Furthermore, the outcome of these mock tests assists teachers in recognizing student deficiencies, so that the gap can be remedied before the actual examinations. 3  Besides the examinations previously mentioned, students are assessed using the “Fountas and Pinnell” Reading Program (F & P). This program is instrumental in determining students’ independent and instructional reading levels within the classroom, and to assist with instructional planning for Small Group Reading (SGR). The F & P reading assessment tools test the students’ accuracy, self-correction, comprehension and fluency. After reading a story independently, the student’s reading ability is measured in comprehension by answering literal and inferential questions. The student may respond to the questions in numerous ways, but an acceptable response is only one that demonstrates the student understands the passage. The running records for oral reading have a set of conventions for coding reading errors: substitution, self-correction, repetition, omission, insertion, sounding out, spelling words, appeal for word, and response is told or aided. The child is tested on concepts of print, phonemic awareness, recognition of letters and sounds, and word recognition. In addition to the “Fountas and Pinnell” Reading Program, the “Wilson Fundations” Program is used to assess and support students’ letter, sound, and sight word acquisition. The “Words Their Way” Program is another assessment tool that guides instructional planning for ELLs. Students are assessed using a spelling inventory to determine their knowledge of phonics and spelling patterns. Students are grouped accordingly based on the results, to a particular level and word sort. Students’ are assessed using teacher/grade created writing prompts. These prompts, which are based on the Common Core Learning Standards, provide an indication of students’ writing abilities and adherence to the conventions of written English. Lastly, student observations are done all the time, and conference notes are written regularly for reading and writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? After administering the various assessments, students are grouped according to their levels based on the results. They are provided differentiated and explicit instruction that addresses the fundamental reading and writing skills, and strategies that they require. The ENL teacher plans instruction for the development of vocabulary, phonemic awareness and decoding, reading readiness, comprehension, and conventions of writing. Additionally, on a school wide basis many committees have been formed to address instructional planning for ELLs and the general student body. These include the: Curriculum Writing Team, Small Group Reading Committee, MOSL Committee, Data Team, and Schoolwide Inquiry Teams. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? P.S. 153 uses a variety of assessments to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need. These include: EasyCBM, Rally, Fountas & Pinnell (F & P), Writing, Go Math, and teacher created assessments. The EasyCBM Assessment System is a universal screener for grades K-5. It is being used for benchmark and progress monitoring for fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension. The benchmarks are administered in the fall, winter, and spring; whereas, the progress monitoring is administered at periodic intervals. Rally is used for ELA and Mathematics simulations in the fall, winter, and spring in preparation for the NYS examinations. The F & P reading assessment is given in September, January, and May to measure students' letter and sight word recognition, fluency, accuracy, and comprehension. Writing is a teacher/grade created assessment. It is administered three times a year-beginning, middle, and end of the school year on the components of narrative writing. Go Math assessments are at the beginning, middle, and end of the year; as well as, at the completion of each instructional unit. All these different measures are means in which P.S. 153 supports ELLs’ instructional needs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The structures in place to address interventions after the data has been collected consist of the EasyCBM, intervisitations, grade level meetings, inquiry, and the Student Intervention Team (SIT). After the administration of the EasyCBM benchmarks, the program automatically furnishes teachers with levels for the tested items. Teachers can use these benchmark scores to sort students by risk to create groups for intervention. In this manner, teachers can plan, set student goals, and differentiate instruction to meet the needs of the identified students. Once groups are formed for intervention, progress monitoring on the EasyCBM will inform teachers if the established interventions have been fruitful. 4  Classroom intervisitations among teachers bring to light new instructional approaches to try on behalf of the students. Grade level meetings occur weekly during Teacher Team Time. This period is set aside for teachers to discuss among other things the assessment results of the students and their needs. Inquiry also happens during this time, in which teachers receive advice and strategies for assisting targeted students for improvement. Students are referred to SIT if classroom interventions do not appear to be sufficient. The team will determine eligibility, and initially propose intervention for the student on a short term basis of six weeks for more strategic instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The collection of data from various sources and assessments is used to guide instruction for ELLs within the RtI framework. ENL, classroom, and cluster teachers, service providers, and administrators all work collaboratively together to create an instructional plan for the linguistically diverse student. Within the classroom, students are provided with scaffolding and ENL methodologies to access the curriculum. Furthermore, ELLs are placed in targeted small groups based on their individual needs to encourage language development. When students are continuing to struggle in the class, the classroom teacher will then present the student to the SIT for further examination. The team devises a plan for a six week interval to aide in student improvement. The plan could consist of remediation strategies the teacher could incorporate into the classroom; as well as, Academic Intervention Support (AIS) and Rti in a targeted, small group setting outside of the classroom. If a student continues to demonstrate persistent difficulties and challenges despite additional, high-quality interventions and supports over an extended period of time, then the student is presented to the School Based Support Team for further targeted support; and or, special education evaluation services. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. P.S. 153 uses the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT)) to analyze the achievement of ELL students. This data informs you if students are making progress and reaching proficiency based on the NYSESLAT scores. Proficiency levels can be tracked from one grade to the next documenting positive or negative movement and stagnation. According to the data patterns across proficiency levels and grades, K-5 students at P.S. 153 have generally remained within the same level, moved up a proficiency level, or tested out of ENL. These results steer teacher practice to improve student learning. ELLs' scores on each strand of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT (Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing) indicate which modality students are succeeding in, and which ones require a more concentrated instructional approach. ELLs are continuously scoring higher in the listening and speaking sections of the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. While most of our ELLs have demonstrated gains in the reading and writing scores, they continue to struggle in these areas. Consequently, more emphasis has been placed on improving reading and writing skills. Performance on the NYS ELA and Mathematics Examinations guide ENL programming too. Test scores reveal if ELLs are making progress, and meeting grade level Common Core standards. Additionally, the ELA and Mathematics scores disclose the degree to which ELLs fare with their non-ELL counterparts. Similarities and differences can be noted which will influence instruction for ELLs. Students with at-risk factors are identified in the EDAT. Knowing which ELLs exhibit risk factors of not making progress on the NYSESLAT; being a holdover; scoring a 1 or 2 on the NYS ELA and/or Mathematics Examination; and classified as a Long-Term ELL is crucial for planning purposes. This data is used to help school personnel devise instruction and interventions that address issues interfering with academic success. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers and administrators are privy to these findings during schoolwide Professional Development, when the information is disseminated to them. Copies of the EDAT report will be forwarded to the staff for their review. Also The Data Committee at P.S. 153 ensures that school personnel is familiar with the statistics of our students state and class scores. Moreover, all staff members have access to Google Drive in which they can review the test scores of enrolled students at the school. 5  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The Freestanding ENL program is delivered using a combination of the pull-out and push-in models depending on students' proficiency levels. Stand Alone Instruction is delivered by a dually certified ESOL and Common Branch ENL teacher. Both the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher co-plan together to deliver instruction to the ELLs in the Integrated setting. ELLs are grouped using a heterogeneous model, or mixed proficiency levels of students in the same grade based on the findings of the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, NYS ELA/Math Examinations, and classroom assessments. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The mandated number of instructional minutes which should be delivered in each program model is based on reviewing the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT Exam History Report generated through the RLAT function on ATS. From this report, it can be ascertained the proficiency levels of the ELLs, and in turn the type (Stand-Alone or Integrated ENL) and number of hours of mandated service. Once this is determined, the information is entered into STARS. Students at the Entering level receive 180 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA per week. Emerging level students receive 90 minutes of Stand-Alone ENL, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA, and 90 minutes of flexible time in either category every week. Transitioning ELLs receive 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA, and another 90 minutes of flexible time weekly in either Stand-Alone ENL or Integrated ENL. ELL students at the Expanding level receive 180 minutes of Integrated ENL a week in either ELA or other content area. Additionally, those ELL students who scored Commanding on the NYSESLAT receive transitional services of 90 minutes a week of Integrated ENL to further strengthen their language skills. In September 2018, we will also implement the newly generated Alternative Pathways option of supporting former ELLs' with small group learning and individualized targeted learning. 2a. The ENL teacher articulates frequently with the classroom teachers of ELLs to co-plan and align lessons to the language and core content needs of the students, to fulfill Common Core Standards. Reinforcement of classroom lessons is a priority. Consideration is given to the students’ schedules to ensure delivery of the ENL Program without sacrificing the students’ classroom work when they are removed. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All core content area instruction in the Freestanding ENL program is delivered in English. The ENL teacher works in conjunction with the classroom teachers to devise lessons in all content areas using ENL methodologies. Various methods of 6  instruction are employed to make content comprehensible. Among them are the SIOP Method, Total Physical Response (TPR), Cooperative Learning, and Thinking Maps.. Instruction is differentiated and scaffold across the content areas to make it more accessible and comprehensible for ELLs, while at the same time maintaining rigor. Anchor charts are displayed around the room for students to consult when doing their assignments. Students also have access to glossaries for reading, math, and science. Reading instruction concentrates on building background knowledge, developing vocabulary, building fluency, making connections, and comprehending fiction and non-fiction text. Word work is also incorporated to focus on phonemic awareness, phonics, and high-frequency words. Leveled books in various genres are provided in both English and Spanish. Writing development is fostered and supported through modeled, guided, and independent writing using the Writing Process. Mathematical concepts are reinforced using hands-on manipulatives and videos, and students are taught the key words to look for to assist them in solving word problems. In Social Studies and Science, academic vocabulary building and reading comprehension strategies are employed to decipher the text. ELLs also have access to technology in the form of the SmartBoard, Promethean Board, and laptops for interactive activities, educational games, websites, and Google translation. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in their native language whenever necessary. Spanish is the predominant language of ELL students at P.S. 153. Students of Spanish descent are able to take the Spanish LAB and the New York State Mathematics and Science Examinations in their native language. Translators are available to support the Spanish speaking students during the state math and science examinations. Spanish speaking students have bilingual books, bilingual dictionaries, and glossaries at their disposal. For other students of non-Spanish descent, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are provided as well. Proctors who speak the languages of the non-Spanish students may be officially requested by the school, through the Department of Translation and Interpretation during the administration of the NYS ELA/Math/Science Examinations. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction and approaches are used for all ELL subgroups at P.S. 153. We aim to ensure that each student’s unique needs are addressed. A. During the completion of the HLIS, initial screening, and interview, SIFE status is determined for any newly identified ELL student registering for grades 3-5 who scored in the entering to emerging levels of proficiency on the NYSITELL. Those affected students who have had lapses in their formal education equating to two or more years are administered a more in-depth oral interview questionnnaire, and the Literacy Evaluation for Newcomer SIFE (LENS) for certain home languages. The answers given to these questions assist the certified ENL teacher in better understanding the educational circumstances of the newcomer SIFE student. Strengths and weaknesses in the student's reading, vocabulary, and math skills will be evident for more effective instructional planning between the ENL teacher and the classroom teacher; as well as, Academic Intervention Services from school personnel. B. New arrivals who have very little knowledge of English or none at all are given classroom supports to make them feel more comfortable. If possible, native language assistance is provided by a buddy student or adult scool staff. A non-threatening environment is created for oral communication to flourish. They are given the mandated number of instructional minutes for their proficiency level. Lessons are made comprehensible with the infusion of visuals, audio, realia, manipulatives, picture dictionaries, computers, small group instruction and individualized support. The ENL and classroom teachers collaborate in curriculum planning. The programs “Moving into English” and “Wilson Fundations” are instrumental at this stage of language acquisition. ELLs who have less than three years of English language knowledge receive the same services mentioned above, and are continually aided in vocabulary acquisition for use in both oral and written assignments. There is scaffolding of concepts. A gradual movement from simply decoding skills to reading comprehension is developed. Writing development is also fostered, along with a concentration in grammar skills. C. Classroom supports for the Developing ELLs will be similar to that of the Newcomer. The ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teachers to prepare the students in the testing grades for the anticipated NYS Examinations in ELA and Mathematics. Additionally, challenging materials are presented to meet the 7  increasing academic and cognitive demands expected of ELLs with four to six years of service. There is an explicit focus on reading comprehension of different genres of text and writing in various genres. Reading solely for information no longer suffices. Reading and writing for critical analysis and evaluation is developed. They are also given the mandated number of instructional minutes for their proficiency level. D. Challenging materials will continually be presented to the student to meet the increasing academic and cognitive demands of school. In addition to the classroom and ENL instruction, ELLs classified in this category would receive intervention in the form of AIS to address literacy and math deficiencies. If warranted, evaluation of the student would occur if remediation does not rectify the issue. E. ELLs who test Commanding on the NYSESLAT, or a combination thereof Expanding and Level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA Examination will continue to receive instruction using ENL strategies across the content areas. Inferential reading and writing for different purposes is fine-tuned. Students engage in more discussion centered topics that allow them to express their opinions, and to agree or disagree with their classmates’ thoughts. Moreover, beginning September 2018 the school will embark on the Alternative Pathways option of small group learning and individualized targeted learning. Lastly, these ELLs are provided with test modifications for up to two years after exiting ELL status. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Two out of the fifteen ELL students receiving ENL services at P.S. 153 are Students with Disabilities (SWD). The ENL teacher, classroom teacher, and special education teachers work collaboratively to ensure that the educational needs of ELLs-SWDs are adhered to, in regards to the stated goals on the IEP and the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results. Differentiated instruction is employed and activities are modified and adapted for the ELL-SWD according to their age, experience, and abilities to foster access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. Instruction is also scaffold. Questions are restated and rephrased. ELL-SWDs are given extended time to respond and prompting. Strategies and skills are modeled across the content areas through mini-lessons. Other strategies that allow ELLs-SWDs to access the curriculum include: Thinking Maps, K-W-L charts, teacher think-alouds, manipulatives, making connections to bridge prior knowledge to current knowledge, cooperative learning, and conversational lead-in prompts. Leveled books are utilized that do not sacrifice academic content and appeal to the student’s interest. The “Wilson Fundations” and “Words Their Way” programs are used to provide phonics and spelling instruction. Teacher-made materials and activities benefit the ELL-SWD too. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At P.S. 153 curricular, instruction, and scheduling flexibility is used to meet the diverse needs of the ELL-SWDs by providing small group instruction, differentiation, and the use of ENL strategies to enhance their learning. The Stand Alone and Integrated models of ENL are employed to service ELLs. Flexible programming is used to maximize the time ELLs-SWDs spend with non-disabled peers who serve as a model to emulate. Articulation with the classroom teacher and all related service providers allows for flexibility in scheduling, so that the ELL-SWDs fulfill their mandated hours of service, but are not removed from the classroom during critical periods of instruction. The ELL-SWDs instructional needs and progress can also be monitored in this respect. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELL students are held to the same high standards and expectations as their general education peers that are promoted and aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. In this vein, ELL students in the general education population classified as SIFE, Long Term, and in some cases Developing who are identified as being at-risk receive Academic Intervention Services (AIS). ELL students requiring extra help in literacy, mathematics, and other content areas are provided with AIS support in English; in addition, to their mandated ENL service hours. Intervention is offered individually and in a small group setting to support ELLs and remediate deficiencies, so that they can attain a higher level of academic achievement and success. The support service to enhance student learning is delivered by AIS providers who are specialists, Special Education teachers, and literacy coaches. At-risk ELLs receive explicit instruction in ELA. The focus is on phonetic awareness, decoding, recognition of high-frequency words, building vocabulary, fluency, reading comprehension, use of Thinking Maps, sentence structure, improving writing skills, and oral language development. In math scaffolding is used to strategically assist in student 8  learning. The use of math organizers, mats, and manipulatives take center stage. Educational math websites are used to provide further visual and interactive practice for math concepts to develop and strengthen skills. Furthermore, the classroom teacher, AIS providers, and the ENL teacher collaborate to plan, assess, and develop students’ needs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the 2018-2019 school year, P.S. 153 will continue its journey in the use of Thinking Maps. This concept was introduced in the school two years ago. Going forward, the emphasis will be on developing more familiarity with the maps, employing lesser used maps more frequently, and using the maps for a variety of learning purposes. In May 2017, the ENL teacher attended a one week workshop in the use of Orton-Gillingham strategies. This approach for teaching phonics and instilling phonetic understanding in students will be implemented in grades Kindergarten through second grade. This school is not a Title III school due to the small population of ELLs in attendance and therefore; will not be receiving any allocated funds for supplementary programs for ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? P.S. 153 has never had a bilingual program. It will maintain the same ELL programs and services that have worked favorably for the school in the past. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs, curricular and extracurricular. ELLs are invited to participate in the following activities: * AIS if they are in the general education classes, but identified as having additional educational needs.* Integrated Co-Teaching and self-contained classes.* Gifted and Talented Program offered at P.S. 153 if they pass the qualifying test.* Additional support from the Literacy Coaches, the Guidance Counselors, and Social Worker. * Saturday, Winter, and Spring Break Academy to brush up on academic skills.* All school activities such as student government, field trips, book clubs, music, chorus, band, drama/theatre, ballroom/modern dance, and school plays and productions. * Schoolwide Enrichment Model (SEM) that allows students to participate in a variety of activities: drumming, chess, jewelry making, scrapbook making, needle point, cooking, and many more choices. * Mosholu Montefiore Young Achievers Program which is an after school community based organization housed at P.S. 153. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Books and materials used in the ENL program assist ELLs on all levels of proficiency reach the academic goals defined in the Common Core Learning Standards. The materials used are: * Thinking Maps* “Moving into English”* “Wilson Fundations”* “Words Their Way” * "Ready Gen"* “Empire State and Finish Line ELL” workbooks* Various children’s literature recorded on tape or cd* “Passageways Anthologies” for non-fiction text* Leveled library books* “SourceBook” reading and writing workbooks * Fountas & Pinnell (F & P) "Leveled Literacy Intervention" * "Targeted Reading Intervention"* Dictionaries, thesauruses, and glossaries in English and native language whenever possible. * “Go Math”* “Envision Math”* Educational math websites which provide further visual and interactive practice to develop and strengthen math skills.* Brain POP, Brain POP Jr., and Brain POP Espanol * Computers, Laptops* SmartBoards and Promethean Boards used to enhance instruction for ELLs 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is assessed through the administration of the Spanish LAB for students of Spanish heritage, to gauge the degree of L1 abilities. For students of other origins, the degree of home language dependence is assessed at enrollment and during the oral interview. Native language supports are delivered in the ENL Program in different ways. Whenever feasible, Newcomers who have little to no English skills are given oral translation by a teacher, paraprofessional, or “buddy” student. This allows the ELL student to feel more comfortable, and thrive in a non-threatening 9  learning environment enabling oral communication to flourish. The ENL classroom library also contains books in Spanish in different genres portraying a variety of cultural experiences. Dictionaries, thesauruses, and glossaries in the native language are used as well. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. P.S. 153 ensures that the required services and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. For instructional purposes, ELLs are placed in groups with no more than two contiguous grades. They are presented with reading materials that are leveled and bilingual allowing for differentiation of instruction targeted to their specific needs. Moreover, teachers use the NYC DOE curriculum “Ready Gen,” “Go Math,” Science, and the NYC Social Studies edition which all provide additional support using the ENL strategy component in the program. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The autistic unit at P.S. 176 shares some of the school space with P.S. 153. As much as is practical, some students from P.S. 176 are mainstreamed into the general education classrooms at P.S. 153. ELLs interact with these mainstreamed students regularly during the course of the day for academic and social activities. A separate ENL teacher is assigned to P.S. 176. Whenever it is feasible, the ENL teachers of both schools communicate to ensure alignment to ENL standards and practices. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Before the beginning of the school year, the Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS) of newly registered students are once again examined by the ENL teacher. The parents of the students who indicated another home language besides English being spoken are contacted to arrange for NYSITELL testing. Throughout the school year, the school counselor is consulted regarding newly enrolled ELLs who may be experiencing adjustment issues. Furthermore, the parent coordinator provides resources to students and parents pertaining to before/after school care and special programs available throughout the community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P.S. 153 does not offer language electives; however, during past Schoolwide Enrichment sessions Spanish instruction has been offered. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P.S. 153 currently does not offer a Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The school administration has enacted a plan to provide professional development for all personnel that addresses the needs of ELLs through the Professional Learning Committee. Formal and informal training is provided as to the nature of working with ELLs. This is accomplished through teacher team time, inquiry team meetings, curriculum planning, individual conferencing and articulation with teachers, Monday Professional Learning, Chancellor’s Conference Days, and attendance at 0  district sponsored workshops. Topics discussed are: the best practices for educating ELLs; the necessity of the ENL and classroom teachers integrating language and content objectives into instruction; testing modifications; and promotional criteria for ELLs. The Pupil Personnel Secretary and the Parent Coordinator also receive professional development regarding their special role in assisting ELLs and their parents. Every effort is made by administration to send the ENL teacher to as many applicable professional development workshops as possible. The ENL teacher attends numerous professional development workshops offered by the Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC) and the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS). This is necessary to keep abreast of the recent approaches and innovations in ENL instruction; to finesse teaching skills; and to be cognizant of new state standards and requirements. Recent workshops attended include: * District 11 monthly ELL Liaison Meetings* Building Academic Language with ELLs in Content Areas* The Annual ELL Symposium The ELLs Service Administrators and the Senior ELL CPS from the Bronx Field Support Center are available via email, or phone to discuss with the ENL teacher any concerns that may occur. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. At P.S. 153, the staff members across grades and disciplines are provided with opportunities to attend different professional development workshops, to make the transition for the ELL population a smooth one. A schedule of impending professional development workshops concerning ELLs that are facilitated by the Bronx Field Support Center, DELLSS, or other reputable organization will be posted in a conspicuous place in the main office and attached to the principal’s weekly Friday Focus emailed to the school staff. Teachers may avail themselves of these recommended training sessions outside of the school building with principal approval. If possible, an arrangement will also be secured with the ELL Service Administrators for the Bronx or a representative from DELLSS to present a staff development workshop during the Chancellor’s Conference Days. A record of teacher attended sessions in fulfillment of the mandated 15% of total hours for all teachers, and 50% of total hours for ENL teachers will be maintained in the school’s Professional Development binder along with the agendas and sign-in sheets. Teachers will also maintain their own personal records of attendance and CTLE hours if necessary. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the beginning of the school year, the parents of ELLs are contacted by the ENL teacher to discuss the results of the NYSESLAT and determine goals pertaining to the child. At the end of the school year parents are invited to an individual meeting with the ENL teacher to discuss the language development progress and needs; and ascertain if the goals established at the beginning of the year were fulfilled. Provisions would be made for additional meetings to occur throughout the school year that also include the classroom and ENL teachers which focus on both content and language skills. The meetings would occur typically on Tuesday afternoons during the time set aside for Parent Engagement, or at another mutually agreed upon time All meetings would have a staff member present who speaks the language of the family to assist in translation and interpretation. In the event that a staff member is not available, then arrangements would be secured for an outside interpreter through the NYC DOE over-the-phone interpretation services. If parents are unable to attend the meetings at school in person, then phone calls or emails would be substituted. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement in a child’s education is essential to maximize English language acquisition for the ELL student. Parental involvement includes a wide range of activities that take place at home or school with the intention of improving the ELL’s 1  learning. Parental involvement at home can include activities such as discussions about school and other topics, helping with homework, and reading with children. Involvement at school includes parents attending workshops to better equip them with the tools necessary to help their children at home, school plays and presentations, or sporting events, and volunteering to be chaperones on class trips and assisting in the classroom. At the ENL Parent Orientation in the beginning of the school year, parents are encouraged to participate in the different programs offered by P.S. 153. These include: * Parent Association-This organization encourages parents to become actively involved in their child's education and an advocate for their needs, despite language limitations.* Parent meetings and workshops conducted by the Parent Coordinator or Literacy Coach during the school day and on some Saturdays-These workshops provide parents with information and resources that empower them to better assist their child.* Monthly Breakfast with the Principal and Parent Coordinator-Parents have an opportunity to discuss school issues and relay their concerns about their children. * Learning Leaders-This program acknowledges parents' request to assist the teacher in a classroom other than their child's classroom. * Nurturing Moms and Fathers of the Helen Keller Organization-The father's organization validates fathers' wishes to have a more readily available presence in the school environment that in the past has been primarily relegated to mothers.* Field Day-This appeals to parents' needs to be involved in their child's education in both academic pursuits and fun activities.* Sustainable Recycling and Planting-The sustainability project allows parents to take a more active role in beautifying the school building, and continuing to make it a pleasant place for their children to attend.* Fundraising-This satisfies the parents' needs to implement new activities and programs that require supplemtal funding to bring to fruition. * Cultural Evening is a celebration of different cultures. Families in attendance wear clothing to reflect their cultures; participate in activities specific to a culture such as games, arts and crafts, and music; and contribute food that depicts their culture. Any time ELL parents are involved, the school ensures that translation and interpretation services are available through the DOE's Language Line and approved vendors. Moreover, a designated interpreter from among the staff is present at any of these meetings to assist parents with language difficulties; as well as, parent volunteers. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Meghan Kelley, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 153 Helen Keller School School DBN: 11X153 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Meghan Kelley Title Principal Assistant Principal Ronald Hartridge Parent Coordinator Kim Maxwell ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jessica Casiano Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11 School Name: Helen Keller Superintendent: Meisha Ross-Por The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kim Maxwell Teacher Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Approximately 1.88 % of the students at P.S. 153 are identified as ELLs using the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT for identification and placement in the ENL program. Translation and interpretation needs were assessed through the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) parents completed when registering their child at the school indicating languages spoken at home. ATS screens utilized to gather information about parents who prefer to communicate in a language other than English include: RAPL, RCPL, and BIOS. The Emergency Contact cards parents complete in the beginning of the school year is another means of obtaining this parental information. The ENL teacher also communicates with all of the parents of the ELL students serviced to get updated information about their preference of language requested for official notices and important information. The UPPG screen in ATS is then used to update parent’s preferred language choice. 5  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali (Bangla) Chinese English IBO Macedonian Pilipino (Tagalog) Spanish Twi 15 1 730 1 1 1 23 1 1.94 0.13 94.32 0.13 0.13 0.13 2.97 0.26 14 0 732 1 1 1 23 2 1.81 0 94.57 0.13 0.13 0.13 2.97 0.26 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Letters from the school administration Throughout the school year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation will be through the school staff, Translation & Interpretation Unit (T & I), and translation vendors for non-covered languages well in advance of their anticipated use. After-school program information September School staff, T & I, and vendors Parent-teacher conference schedule September, November, March, and May DOE internet templates for covered languages, school personnel, and vendors. 6  Event letters Ongoing Letters for an individual student Ongoing Bilingual staff, DOE templates Existing DOE intranet templates, school staff, Google Translate 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent-Teacher Conferences September, November, March, and May School staff and Language Line over-The ENL Parent Orientation September and ongoing End of year Parent Meetings May/June the-phone interpretation services Bilingual school staff, Language Line, and parent volunteer School personnel and Language Line N/A N/A N/A 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Prior to an emergency occurring, parents who communicate in a language other than English will be apprised of the Language Line features school personnel uses for interpretation purposes. Parents will be informed that this service can be activated during an emergency when the school is trying to reach them. Conversely, when parents who prefer another language besides English need to reach the school in an emergency the phone script feature of Language Line will be implemented. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The significance of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 in relation to translation and interpretation services for parents who prefer a language other than English will be explained to the staff of P.S. 153. This will be accomplished through the Language Access Coordinator and the ENL teacher turnkeying the language access information at school meetings. Staff will be told that materials, notices, and letters can be translated into Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish, and Urdu which represent the nine languages that most of the DOE families speak and write aside from English. Translation for other languages that fall outside of this realm can also be obtained through an arrangement with an approved DOE vendor. In either case, a translation request form is available through the DOE intranet. The completed translation request and document to be translated should be emailed to 7  translations@schools.nyc.gov. Furthermore, the school staff will be made aware of the fact that common DOE documents and sample letters are available already translated in the nine popular languages on the DOE intranet. For oral interpretation needs, the school staff can call the Language Line at 1-800-231-0288 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to get over-the-phone interpretation services for 200 languages. Moreover, staff will be given copies of the Language Line flyer; an information card displaying the nine dominant other languages spoken by DOE families; as well as, a Language Identification Guide listing 30 languages. Parents can point to the prompt on the card and guide which identifies their language for interpretation purposes. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 153 will post the Multilingual Welcome Poster at the front entrance to the school. The Language ID Guide and Parent Guide to Language Access will also be available near the security desk and main office. Parents will be given written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services available in the appropriate language provided by staff members or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Parents will be informed that notification documents can be accessed through the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Language Access Coordinator/Parent Coordinator as well as the ENL teacher will inquire of parents their sentiments regarding the level of satisfaction experienced with translation and interpretation services at P.S. 153. This will be accomplished through establishing a focus group of parents comprised of different cultures and languages reflected at P.S. 153. Their opinions and feedback on how the school is performing in this capacity will be noted to influence future changes. 8 
