 11X160 School Name: P.S. 160 WALT DISNEY Principal: LORI BAKER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Walt Disney Magnet STEAM School 321100010160 PreK-5th School Number (DBN): 11X160 4140 Hutchinson River Parkway East, Bronx, NY 10476 (718) 822-8402 Phone Number: (718) 822-8416 Fax: Lori Baker lbaker3@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Lori Baker NelidaPagan Shekinah Sayers Katherine Atiles David Dukes N/A N/A YliannaGarcia District Information Geographical District: 11 Dr. Jeremy Kabinoff Superintendent: 2750 Throop Avenue, Bronx, NY 10469 Superintendent’s Office Address: jkabino@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 519-2620 Phone Number: (718) 519-2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: 11 Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1250 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 Nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-5643 Phone Number: (718) 828-3113 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lori Baker NelidaPagan Shekinah Sayers N/A David Dukes N/A N/A N/A Katherine Atiles Lynda Nelson Martin Bauer *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/CSA Member/ UFT Member/UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ReneeGaynorParker TiamberJohnson Maria Dukes Roseanna Samaroo N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? School Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview Everyday at the Walt Disney Magnet STEAM School, teacher teams collaboratively engage in data analysis and careful planning to ensure lessons are being taught with individual students in mind. In engaging environments, our hands-on approach to teaching and learning incorporates high reliability strategies that create memorable learning experiences where:   Students receive meaningful feedback from teachers and peers.   Opportunities to reinforce learning through intervention.  Students engage in self-directed inquiry to generate interdisciplinary solutions to real-work problems. School Vision Statement At P.S. 160, The Walt Disney Magnet STEAM School, educators, students, and parents form a partnership dedicated to developing ingenuity and igniting a passion for learning. Our students identify as collaborative with others in order to be successful in life. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Walt Disney Magnet STEAM School is a Pre-K through fifth grade school located in Co-op City in the North East Bronx, in Community District 11. The school focus is curriculum based on Science, Technology, Engineering, the Arts, and Mathematics. It serves a student population of 419 students. The school is centered among 15 cooperative buildings of which 90% of the students reside. P.S. 160 is co-located on the 11X160 campus with two other schools, The Equality Charter School, which is a middle school serving students in grades sixth through eighth and X168, a District 75 elementary school that serve students with special needs in grades K through 3. This year P.S. 160 will begin a pre-k Dual Language English/Spanish class. Each year a new grade will be added to the program until the program expands to grade 5. The Instructional Focus of P.S. 160 for 2018-2019 school year is: If the analysis of mathematics data and ELA data by teacher and instructional teams informs classroom teaching then students will be provided with rigorous instruction which will include prescribed enrichment and/or intervention task to meet their individual needs. The Equity Focus for the 2018-2019 school year is: When our students of color are required to interact with relevant and pertinent questions through various modes of engagement that are challenging yet inclusive of their individual strengths then they will be prepared with the foundation to be critical thinkers and competitive in today's society. 0  Through analyzing student data, we found that on the New York State ELA exam 63% of students in 3rd grade scored levels 3 or 4, 28% of students in 4th grade scored levels 3 or 4, and 33% of students in 5th grade scored levels 3 or 4. On the New York State Math exam, 50% of 3rd grade students scored levels 3 or 20% of 4th grade students scored levels 3 or 4, and 33% of 5th grade students scored levels 3 or 4. In reviewing the item analysis for the New York State ELA and New York State Math exams, we found that more than 50% of students in 3rd, 4th, and 5th grades had difficulty answering questions related to key ideas/details and measurement & date, and fractions. As a result, the school has identified an instructional focus that will assist us in preparing students for college and careers. The instructional focus is as follows: If the analysis of mathematics data and ELA data by teacher and instructional teams informs classroom teaching then students will be provided with rigorous instruction which will include prescribed enrichment and/or intervention task to meet their individual needs. School-wide, the Common Core Standards we will continue to focus our attention on, in the content area of English Language Arts are Craft/Structure, Key Ideas, and Details. In the area of Mathematics we will focus on Numbers and Operations – specifically fractions and measurement and data. Our school community is unique in that we are a professional learning community with various collaborative teams. Within grades pre-K through fifth grade, there is a Teacher Leader identified for each grade. The Teacher Leader is responsible for ensuring that all members of the grade team are aware of pertinent information regarding the grade and the school as a whole. The school schedule operates on a seven day cycle. Each grade has common planning time twice within the cycle. During this time the teachers of each grade meet to collaborate and to discuss best practices that will lead to improvements and lesson quality, instructional effectiveness and student achievement. There are Inquiry Teams on each grade, as well as, a Special Education Inquiry Team and a Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) Inquiry Team. These teams are immersed in the collaborative inquiry cycle with an identified target population of students per grade. The work of these teams is mainly built around the instructional focus of the school. Through the work of these teams instructional strategies are created and refined to improve student outcomes. The school also has a Teacher Leader Professional Learning Team. This team meets on a monthly basis to discuss the school-wide curriculum or instructional adjustments that may be needed. The need for these adjustments are grounded in data from both formative and summative assessments and from analyzing student work. Teachers also participate in classroom inter-visitations. P.S. 160 is a partner in the NYCDOE District Charter Collaborative Program. This program is designed to facilitate collaboration between district and charter schools. By way of the collaboration, the school works together over 2 academic years in professional learning communities. P.S. 160 is a partner in the NYCDOE Campus District Charter Partnership (CDCP). Parents learn about the school's curriculum through various learning opportunities such as the P.S. 160 Parent Academy, Parent Learning Walks, Curriculum Week, Tuesday Parent Engagement,School Leadership Team Meetings and Parent Roundtables. Parents also collaborate with teachers as they assist in classrooms through the Learning Leaders Program. The school has a sound collaborative partnership with the Mosholu Montefiore Community Center (MMCC). MMCC provides an after school day care program. The program serves students in kindergarten through fifth grade. It runs from the end of the school day until 5:30PM from September through June. There is also a summer camp component to the program. 1  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. N/A 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In the area of school strengths as evidenced by the 2016-17 School Quality Review, P.S. 160 was rated as "proficient" in ensuring engaging rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects is accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards. Noted as an area of celebration was that P.S. 160 established a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students and families, and provides support to achieve those expectations. The school has a well established Positive Behavioral Intervention System – (PBIS) program. The program has been in existence at PS 160 for nine years and has the support of students, staff members, and parents. Our school's recent accomplishment has been the successful implementation of a STEAM curriculum (Science, Technology,Engineering, The Arts and Mathematics) during the 2016-17 school year.The school has also accomplished achieving Annual Yearly Progress (AYP) for our students with disabilities for the 2013-2014 school year. As a result, the school has been removed from the Focus school list and has been designated a school in Good Standing by the New York State Department of Education. We continue to work diligently on the challenge to close the achievement gap for our students with Special Needs in Mathematics. The DTSDE Tenent that we have made the greatest growth in during the previous year was 3.2-Ensure that a cohesive comprehensive and adaptive curriculum inclusive of clearly developed units align to CCLS and New York state standards, is used in all areas of study including interventions. Last year, the teachers were involved in professional learning opportunities that focused on ensuring the alignment of the programs used in all content areas, to the Common Core Learning Standards. The school continues to ensure that instructional practices and strategies that plan for students with disabilities and English Language Learners is evident in lesson development (4.2). 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X160 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 410 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 74 69 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 46 38 24 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 64.4% % Reduced Lunch 4.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 31.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 42.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 12 11 24 93.6% 6.3% 22.4% 62.4% 1.7% 2.9% 2 3% 7.3 35.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As stated in the 2016-17 Central Led Review Report, P.S. 160 will need to focus attention on aligning assessments to curricula using on-going assessments and grading practices: As a next step for improvement on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 20% of students in grades 3-5 including Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will meet proficiency levels in English Language Arts as measured by the NYS ELA Assessment. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The systems and structures needed in place are as follows: ● I-Ready Digital System ● Inquiry Teams (Grade Level, Special Education, SETSS ● Project Based Learning Team ● Teacher Leader Professional Learning Team ● Teachers College Reading Program ● Common Planning Meetings (twice in a 7 day cycle) ● Weekly Professional Learning Meetings ● Inter-visitations ● Academic Intervention/Enrichment Early Morning Programs ● English as a Second Language Services ● Student access to the MyOn online Literacy Program ● Common Core Learning Standards online programs ● Teachers College Writing Program ● Project Based Learning ● Thematic Units ● Monday Professional Learning Blocks The strategies that will be utilized are as follows: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018-June 2019 Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team , Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher All students in grades Pre-K - 5 including general education, students with disabilities, English Language Learners and students receiving Academic Intervention Services with additional focus on the sub group of, Economically Disadvantaged students. All students in grades Pre-K - 5 including September 2018-June 2019 Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics 5  ● The development of rigorous academic tasks through the use of the Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix and the Depth of Knowledge ● Flexible scheduling for student programs when appropriate ● Written teacher feedback with next steps for learning articulated to the students ● Grade, class and student specific goals for learning ● An introduction/review of vocabulary on a daily basis; using a text based vocabulary in whole/small group discussion and /or within their writing (Shift 6-ELA: Academic vocabulary) ● Students with a deep understanding and focus on the significant aspect of the standard being addressed ● Students with multiple strategies to solve problems and encourage to choose a strategy that works best for them Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement are: ● P.S. 160 Parent Academy ● Parent Round Table Discussions ( Monthly) ● Learning Walks ● Parent Workshops (Monthly) ● Six Week Parenting Workshops ● Extended Tuesday Parent Conversations (Weekly) Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team , Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher General Education, Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and students receiving Academic Intervention Services with additional focus on the sub group of, Economically Disadvantaged students. September 2018-June 2019 Parents of all students in grades Pre-K - 5 including General Education, Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners with additional focus on the sub group of, Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Parent-Teacher Association, Business Partners 6  ● Curriculum Week & Open School Week Class Visitations ● Community Initiative Board ● Monthly PTA Meetings ● Phone message system ● School App ● School E-Chalk Website ● Meet and Greet Curriculum Nights (September and May) Activities that address the Capacity Framework element of Trust are: ● Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings ● Monthly Teacher Leader Professional Learning Team Meetings ● Teacher Common Planning Meetings ● Professional Learning Meetings ● Staff and Principal Consultation Meetings ● PBIS Spirit Week ● PBIS Celebrations, Rewards and Incentives ● Quarterly PTA and administrative team meetings ● Administrative Team Meeting ● Professional Learning Turnkey Meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Economically Disadvantaged students. within the School Community September 2018-June 2019 Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team , Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS,) Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher Teachers of all students in grades Pre-K - 5 including General Education, Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and students receiving Academic Intervention Services with additional focus on the sub group of, Economically Disadvantaged students. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 7  P.S. 160 will engage families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core by: - Informing and explaining to parents the New York City, New York State & Federal standards students are expected to meet; how students’ progress is measured, as well as provide information regarding the Common Core Standards curriculum currently in use at the school. - Informing and providing the parents with any training and materials available for them to help them work with their children. - Informing parents of any resources, such as transportation and child care, which may be available in order to allow them to attend and participate in school events. - Informing them of and bring to the parents any other programs available through community resources, which may be of use or interest to them, whenever possible. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will be utilized to finance the positions of Literacy Instructional Lead and Mathematics Instructional Lead. A Special Education Instructional Lead position will also be established. Allocations funds will be used to fund a full time ENL Teacher. The overall school program will consist of a 7 day schedule. (Ex. Day 1, Day 2 etc.) This will provide teachers with more time to meet with their students for small group instruction. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -By December 2018 through progress monitoring, 5% of students in grades 3-5 including Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will meet proficiency levels in reading as measured by the I-Ready progress monitoring system. -By February 2019 through progress monitoring, an additional 5% of students in grades 3-5 including Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners will meet proficiency levels in reading as measured by the I-Ready Progress monitoring system. 8  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) TC Running Records, Unit Tests, and Inquiry based performance tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? As stated in the 2016-17 Quality Review Report, P.S. 160 demonstrates strength in: ● Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults. Our priority needs include: ● To strategically use data to identify targeted areas of need in order to show a reduction in OORS ● Utilize internal or external resources to build relationships between staff, students, and families that will strongly impact student’s social emotional development Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 9% increase in parent engagement as a result of the implementation of a student House System which will impact on positive social/emotional behaviors as measured by the parent sign-in sheets, meetings, and the On-line Occurence Reporting Systems (OORS). 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 – June 2019 School Administrative Team, Guidance Team, Social Worker Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher, Academic Leads, PBIS Team Internal Resources ● Implementation of student House System ● Small group counseling (once within a 7 day cycle) ● Individual/At-risk counseling (once within a 7 day cycle) ● Crisis counseling ((once within a 7 day cycle or as needed) All students PreK-5 including English Language Learners SWD’s (IEP students) ● Social Skills Group ● PBIS Program ● PBIS Check In/Check Out (Tier II) ● Basketball Program/Soccer Program ● Lunchroom Weekly Incentives ● Respect For All Week ● PBIS Initiative Kick-Off/Booster Days/End Term Celebration ● PBIS Monthly Rewards ● Daily Behavior Progress Monitored/Red, yellow, orange ● Student Council ● Thrive NYC/School Mental Health Consultancy ● Peer Mediators PBIS Lunchtime Teacher (Weekly on Tuesdays & 1  Thursdays) Strategies to Increase Parent Involvement & Engagement ● Boys Town (6 week program) ● ENACT Workshops ● Local business incentives ● Parent Roundtable (monthy) ● Tuesday Parent Engagement Sessions (weekly) ● Saturday Academy Activities that Address Capacity Framework – Trust ● Monthly PBIS Spirit Week ● Weekly PBIS Character Education Lessons ● RTI Meetings (Response to Intervention) ● PBIS Team Meetings ● PBIS Booster Days ● FBA/BIP Meeting SIT Team Meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 – June 2019 School Administrative Team, Community Member Volunteers,PTA, Boys Town Staff, ENACT personnel, CBO Community Based Organization members, Parent Coordinator September 2018 – June 2019 School Administrative Team, Guidance, Parent Coordinator, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher, Educational Lead How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 160 will Build the school’s and the parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement through the implementation of student House System, collaborative school-parent planning, ongoing parent-school communication, and the integration of parents into professional development and other school activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be utilized to finance two Guidance Counselors and one Social Worker. Materials will be purchased to enhance the Positive Behaviors and Supports System (PBIS) within the school. The school schedule will allow for the 2  Guidance Team to push into classrooms to provide lessons on positive behavior. They will also have time scheduled to meet with small groups of students struggling with at-risk behaviors. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -By December 2018, 10% of students in grades Pre-K-5 will acquire positive social/emotional behaviors as measured by the On-line Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). -By February 2019, an additional 10% of students in grades Pre-K-5 will acquire positive social/emotional behaviors as measured by the On-line Occurrence Reporting System (OORS). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Online Occurrence Reporting System, Suspension Tracking Sheet, and Check In/Check Out Record Sheet Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As stated in the 2016-17 Quality Review Report, distributive leadership practices are in place so that teachers are engaged in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improving student learning. Our priority needs include: Continuing to build teacher capacity by providing structures that continue to encourage and promote distributive leadership practices in the school. Encourage effective and more seasoned teachers to take on grade-level leadership roles so that they serve as mentors and models of best practices in their areas of strengths (areas could include ELA/literacy, math, lesson planning, data, curriculum mapping, assessment, differentiation, classroom management, questioning techniques, etc.) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 15% of the Teachers will move at least one level on the Danielson HEDI scale in Domain 3 Components b – Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques and c – Engaging Students in Learning as a result of updating the school's thematic units to include rigorous project based learning experiences and school leadership providing professional learning opportunities focused on developing teacher pedogogy as measured by teacher observations. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 – June 2019 All teachers Pre-K – 5 including General Education, Special Education, SETSS, Clusters Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team , Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activities/Strategies  Teachers participate in grade level Inquiry work every 3rd week of the month during common planning time. When participating in this work, teachers in all grades (Pre-K-5) review student work using a school-wide protocol. During the team meetings the teachers discuss the quality of the student’s work as it relates to the established rubric, the student understanding of the task and the implications for teaching practice.  Teachers and paraprofessionals engage in monthly vertical grade meetings to collaborate and discuss curriculum.  Teachers are provided with three common planning periods within a seven day cycle to work collaboratively on developing student tasks while utilizing a grade specific Common Core Learning Standards checklist.  Teachers work collaboratively in common planning to utilize a grade specific Common Core Learning Standards checklist when developing student tasks. Teachers also have the opportunity to participate in curriculum planning during Tuesday professional work time.  Teachers utilize the Hess Cognitive Rigor Matrix and Webb’s Depth of Knowledge to ensure that student questions and tasks are developed at a higher level.  Administrative Team and Instructional Team Learning Walks  New Teacher Center Mentoring Program  Teachers and Administrative Staff Participating in Teachers College Writing Project  Pre-K Instructional Support provided by the Office of Early Childhood  Common Core Learning Standard aligned Thematic Curriculum Maps with a STEAM focus are being implemented in each grade. All teachers have access to the grade level curriculum maps through Google Docs. A curriculum adjustments are highlighted in red to indicate any necessary adjustments that need to be done in 5  Google Docs. Adjustments are indicated in red in Google Docs.  Teachers meet weekly to make curriculum adjustments and updates.  Teachers are participating in Bronx Field Support Center facilitated workshops to create Common Core aligned tasks across all content areas.  Teachers participate in Buck Institute professional learning.  Teachers utilize common lesson plan templates that indicate differentiated instruction for all students including English Language Learners, as well as, strategic support, on target support, and enrichment support.  Teachers utilize the Common Core Learning Standards as the focal point in creating challenging and rigorous tasks resulting in students demonstrating higher order thinking skills.  The school program operates on a seven day schedule. The seven day schedule allows for a daily period to include the integration of intervention and enrichment, as well as, the inclusion of the arts.  Teacher Team professional development will be conducted by the Center for Educational Innovation in the month of March. Feedback will be provided to the teachers with actionable next steps.  Professional Learning: ● Inquiry Cycles ● EngageNY ● Teacher's College Reading ● Teacher’s College Writing ● Intervisitations ● Social Studies Scope and Sequence ● Science Scope and Sequence ● Amplify Science Additional Activities : September 2018 – June 2019 All teachers Pre-K – 5 including General Education, Special Education, SETSS, Clusters Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher ● Common Planning, Teacher Team and New Teacher Meetings ● New Teacher Center Mentoring Program 6  ● Grade Level Peer Instructional Learning Walks ● Instructional Team Learning Walks Parental Involvement: ● Parent Teacher Conferences ● Open School Week ● Learning Leaders ● Parent Workshops ● Parent Instructional Walk-throughs ● Parent Roundtables Activities that Address the Capacity Framework - Trust ● Self-selected Intervisitations ● Teacher Teams ● Mentors ● Inquiry Teams ● Common Planning ● School Community Celebrations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement September 2018 – June 2019 Parents of grades Pre-K – 5, students in General and Special Education September 2018 – June 2019 All teachers Pre-K – 5 including General Education, Special Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher , Parent Coordinator Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 160 will engage families by convening regular meetings, at times facilitating greatest parental participation, at which parents will be able to gain information, voice opinions, and offer approval or rejection of proposed programs and policies. These shall include the following meetings: 1. Monthly meetings of the general PTA membership 2. Monthly meetings of the School Leadership Team 3. Meetings of any standing PTA committees 4. Meetings of any parental action committees as formed in accordance with PTA by-laws 7  5. Meetings called by the Parent Coordinator in order to maintain open communication with the parents and monitor their concerns, interests, and needs such as: Our Monthly Parent Roundtable Meetings and workshops. 2) By establishing various forms of clear and consistent communication with the parents, through the distribution of flyers, the Parent 411 Newsletter, The Walt Disney website, Parent Handbook and the Global Connect Messenger system, parents will be encouraged regularly to partake in discussions about school programs, students’ academic progress and behavior management. Such communication shall be provided in alternative formats and languages as necessary, and shall stress the importance of communication between the teachers and parents through: 1. Regular attendance of parent-teacher conferences; 2. Reports to parents on their child’s progress, e.g. Bi-weekly progress reports    conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will be utilized to fund Generation Ready professional learning for the staff. The school program will allow for teachers to be covered in order to participate in intervisitations and various professional learning opportunities. The following systems will be purchased to house schoolwide data and curriculum resources: Skedula and Atlas Rubicon. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 8   By December 2018, 5% of the Teachers will move at least one level on the Danielson HEDI scale in Domain 3 Components b – Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques and c – Engaging Students in Learning as measured by teacher observations.  By February 2019, 10% of the Teachers will move at least one level on the Danielson HEDI scale in Domain 3 Components b – Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques and c – Engaging Students in Learning as measured by teacher observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP Score Tracker, DRA, Ready Gen Performance Tasks, Go Math Performance Tasks, Unit Tests and New York City Performance Tasks in Math. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As noted in the 2016-17 Quality Review Report, P.S. 160 was rated proficient in the following :  Teachers engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improving student learning.  The administrative team observes teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. Our priority needs include:  Developing teacher pedogogy from coherent set of beliefs abut how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the need of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of Teachers analyzing data on student outcomes to adjust instructional decisions in order to include prescribed enrichment and/or intervention tasks as evidenced by a 10% increase of Teachers improving their practice at least one HEDI scale level as reflected in Component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) of the Danielson Rubric. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher , Parent Coordinator, PBIS Team, Professional Learning Team The strategies listed below will will address the needs of teachers of all students including Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and the Economically Disadvantaged: Teachers of all students September 2018-June 2019 ● Continue to build on collaborative work amongst teachers by conducting intervisitations, participating in Common Planning and differentiated professional learning opportunities to assist with building capacity within the teaching staff.  Distributive leadership throughout the school within the various teams and leadership roles. -Grade Level Teacher Team Leaders - Teacher Team Meetings - Professional Learning Committee -Equity Team - PBIS Team -RTI Team -FBA-BIP Team -SIT Team   Teacher Led Professional Learning Sessions   Teacher Instructional Leads (Literacy, Mathematics & STEAM Thematic Curriculum Mapping Special Education) These teams meet as small professional learning communities to plan strategically and ensure coherence throughout the school. in grades Pre-K - 5 including general education, Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and students receiving Academic Intervention Services, Teacher Mentors. 1   A list of Teachers that have been identified with expertise in specific strategies has been compiled. This resource is used as a guide while arranging peer inter- visitations to further enhance teacher professional practice.  Teachers participate in reflective teaching practices by taking part in Peer inter-visitations of colleagues within their grades and the grades above and below the current grade they are teaching when appropriate.During peer inter-visitations teachers are asked to complete an Inter-visitation Debrief Tool.The tool is utilized to assist in guiding the discussion during the debrief. Teachers are also encouraged to arrange self-selected independent peer inter-visitations to colleagues’ classrooms. ● Teachers participate in double periods of common planning ● Teachers participate in Inquiry Team work in an effort to refine their practice to positively impact student outcomes ● New teachers are mentored by senior staff members using methodologies from the New Teacher Mentoring Center ● Conduct study groups to strengthen teacher practice that is within the ineffective and developing areas on the HEDI rubric within the Danielson Framework. Teachers of all students September 2018-June 2019 ● Assist teachers in selecting external and internal professional learning opportunities that meet their needs based on various forms of feedback. (ex. informal/formal observations, analysis of student work etc.) in grades Pre-K -5 who’s practice is within the ineffective and developing areas on the HEDI rubric within the Danielson Framework. Including General Education, Students Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher , Parent Coordinator, PBIS Team, Professional Learning Team, Generation Ready 2  with Disabilities, English Language Learners and students receiving Academic Intervention Services. Strategies to increase parent involvement and engagement for all students including Students With Disabilities and English Language Learners are: Parents of all students September 2018-June School Administrative ● P.S. 160 Parent Academy to obtain a common understanding of the instruction within the school. ● Parent Round Table to discuss school concerns and develop collaborative solutions ● Parent Learning Walks ● Parent Workshops ● Six Week Parenting Workshops ● Extended Tuesday Parent Conversations ● Curriculum Week & Open School Week Class Visitations ● Community Initiative Board ● Monthly PTA Meetings ● Parent Title 1 Funded Workshops in grades 2019 Pre-K - 5 including General Education, Students with Disabilities and English Language Learners. Team, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Service Teachers, Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher Parent Coordinator, Parent- Teacher Association, 3  Activities that address the Capacity Framework Element of Trust Teachers of In an effort to increase parent involvement and engagement all students September 2018-June 2019 are: ● Monthly School Leadership Team Meetings ● Monthly Teacher Leader Professional Learning Team Meetings ● Staff and Principal Consultation Meetings ● PBIS Spirit Week ● PBIS Celebrations, Rewards and Incentives  Equity Team Meetings  Grade Level Meetings in grades Pre-K - 5 including General Education, Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and students Business Partners within the School Community, , PBIS Team, Professional Learning Team Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher , Parent Coordinator, , PBIS Team, Professional Learning Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 160 will engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership by:   creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 4   sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources will be utilized to purchase systems to support the school-wide instructional program as well as, the PBIS program. Funding will be used to purchase instructional support from Generation Ready. Funding will be allocated to pay for teacher participation in PBIS training. In addition, a adjustments to the school program will be made in order to schedule coverages for teacher intervisitations. Teacher substitute coverage will be provided to allow for the attendance at professional learning opportunities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 5% of the Teachers will move from developing to effective on the Danielson HEDI scale in Domain 3 Component D as a result of school leadership providing structures that encourage distributive leadership as evidence by the Advance MOTP Score Tracker. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Observations, MOTP Score Tracker Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As stated in the 2016-17 Quality Review Report, P.S. 160 demonstrates:  An established culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families and provides supports to achieve those expectations. Our priority needs include:  Continuing to support the PTA’s efforts for increasing parent membership and volunteerism in order to strengthen the home-school connection.  Developing and disseminating an interest survey to parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of our students of color and all students traditionally underserved will interact with rigorous, relevant, and pertinent curriculum through varied modes of engagement that is challenging and inclusive of their individual cultural strengths and needs. 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018– June 2019 All Pre-K – 5 parents including new parents, fathers, parents of SWD’s , parents of English Language Learners, Guardians, Grandparents Literacy Instructional Lead, Mathematics Instructional Lead, Special Education Instructional Lead, School Administrative Team, Classroom Teachers, Cluster Teachers, Special Education Teacher Support Services Teachers (SETSS), Academic Intervention Teacher, ENL Teacher , Parent Coordinator, , PBIS Team, Professional Learning Team, CBO personnel, Learning Leaders, External Parent Support Organizations Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activities/Strategies ● ENACT Parent Workshops ● Postings on school website (with translation feature) ● Global Connect/Blackboard phone messaging service ● Flyers/notices ● Parent calendar ● PTA Meetings ● Adult literacy in ESL/ENL ● Thrive NYC - School Mental Health Consultancy ● Curriculum Week ● Meet and Greet Curriculum Nights (September and May) ● Monthly Parent Roundtables ● Parent Learning Walks ● School Leadership Team ● Progress Reports ● Newsletter ● Parent Academies 7  ● Parenting classes ● D.A.D.S Initiative ● Open School Class Visitations Week ● Parent surveys ● Boys Town ● School E-Chalk Website ● Move to Action Parent Group ● Boy Scouts ● Theme Based Parent-Child Workshops ● MYon Parent Workshops ● Class DoJo ● Student Government - Pep Squad Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Montefiore/Mosholu Afterschool Program, Boystown Parenting Group, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will be allocated to support workshops and instructional materials provided by ENACT. Funding will also be utilized to sustain the school E-Chalk website and to purchase the Wiz Fish school App. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By December 2018, there will be a 25% increase in teacher/ parent interactions as measured by teacher/ parent sign-in sheets at events, digital communication, workshops, meetings and conferences. 8   By February 2019, there will be an additional 25% increase in teacher/ parent interactions as measured by parent sign-in sheets at events, digital communication, workshops, meetings and conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign In Sheets, Framework for Great Schools Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) NYS ELA score Level 1 or 2, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Skill by Skill Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group and 1:1 Instruction During school day and afterschool TC Reading/Writing Direct Instruction, Skill Sophistication, Mathematics ReadyGen Units tests which includes Performance Based Assessments NYS Math score Level 1 or 2, Unit Tests which includes Performance Based Assessments Eureka Math Science 4 th Gr NYS ELA K-5 Science Unit Tests which includes Project Based Assessments Guided Practice to include Guided Writing I-Ready Strand by Strand Small Group and 1:1 Instruction During school day and afterschool Direct Instruction, Skill Sophistication, Small Group and 1:1 Instruction During school day and afterschool Guided Practice I-Ready 4 th Gr Kaplan Advantage Simple Solutions Amplify Science Guided Practice, Guided Writing, Direct Instruction, Scaffolded Support with the Scientific Inquiry Method, 0  Social Studies K-5 Social Studies Unit Tests Scaffolded Support for Tier 3 Content Level Vocabulary Passport Small Group and 1:1 Instruction Direct Instruction, Guided Writing, During school day Guided Practice, Scaffolded Support with DBQ Questioning, Scaffolded Support for Tier 3 Content Level Vocabulary PBIS Check In/ Check Out At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students having difficulty with Tier 1 PBIS Small Group and 1:1 conferencing Throughout the school day 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 42 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will be supporting our students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending our school by providing the following: - Clothing - STH funds - Backpacks, uniforms, books and school supplies Additional academic services, parent workshops throughout the year, and transportation as needed will be provided. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In May, preference sheets are distributed to all members of the teaching staff. On the sheet there is a question that asks teachers if they will be returning in September. If a teacher indicates that he or she will not be returning, the school will begin the recruitment process during the month before the conclusion of the school year. Possible candidate resumes are obtained through assistance from the Human Resources Director and the Open Market System. Once possible candidate’s resumes are selected for interviews, the school’s hiring committee convenes to conduct the interviews. The hiring team consists of teachers and the administrative team. Possible candidates must possess the following in order to be interviewed: ● A bachelor’s degree from a four year institution ● A valid NYS Certificate for the vacancy Once candidates are interviewed their interview responses are graded using a rubric. The hiring committee then selects the candidates that they would like to conduct demonstration lessons. The lesson is conducted in a class on the grade level of the vacancy. The hiring committee will then make a selection based on the initial interview performance and the demonstration lesson performance. Once hired, new teachers (new to teaching and new to the school) are each given an in-house mentor. New teachers are required to meet with their mentors on a weekly basis. New teachers are also provided with professional development on all instructional priorities such as weekly Professional Development, inter-visitations (scheduled and self-selected), Book Studies, Teacher Leader Professional Learning Team, Teacher Team Meetings and support from the school’s Instructional Leads (Literacy, Mathematics, Special Education). Annually, the BEDS Survey is reviewed. If a teacher is found to not be highly qualified, the teacher will be required to consider the Conversion Program where teachers certified in a non-shortage area subject can obtain certification in a shortage area subject. They will also be encouraged to take the HOUSSE. Teacher retention is achieved through feedback from the observation process. The feedback will serve as a guide to assist in providing targeted professional development that lead to instructional improvements. 4  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). A Professional Development Calendar for the school year has been developed. The calendar includes professional development workshops and activities to support all staff members in assisting students in achieving the Common Core Learning Standards. Through feedback provided from informal and formal observations, differentiated professional development will address the needs of individual teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parents of students that are transitioning from Pre Kindergarten to Kindergarten participate in the “New Pre- K and Kindergarten Open House”. The Open House takes place during the month of January. Following the Open House, families are invited to participate in the Spring Learning Walk. During the Learning Walk, parents are provided the opportunity to visit classrooms and view instruction taking place. The Learning Walk is led by the school’s Parent Coordinator, Instructional Leads (3), and school administration. Prior to the Learning Walk, the school data is explained to the parents by the Assistant Principal/School Data Specialist. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The teachers have been involved in the selection process of the use of assessments. This has been done by the development of a committee specifically for this purpose. The school committee is comprised of representation from the various grades, as well as, special education teachers. The committee, along with the school administrative team, discusses and selects the appropriate assessments that they feel will give the best and most valuable insight on 5  student progress. During Inquiry and Teacher Team Meetings teachers are given focused support from the school Data Specialist on how to use student data results to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Pg 5 Section b Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal $246,494.00 $56,082.00 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,459,581.00 X X N/A N/A X Pg 5 Section c Pg 5 Section d Pg 5 Section b Pg 5 Section c Pg 5 Section d N/A N/A Pg 5 Section b Pg 5 Section c Pg 5 Section d 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 6  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy School Parent Involvement Policy P.S. 160 The Walt Disney Magnet steam School Ms. Lori Baker, Principal Ms. Katherine Atiles, Asst. Principal Ms. Kwafi Gray, Parent Coordinator School Parent Involvement Policy- 9  We, the administrators, staff and teachers of P.S. 160, strongly believe that educating our students is a shared responsibility to be divided between the parents and the school. We understand that the parents are the student’s first teachers and that research has proven that parental involvement plays a key role in a student’s academic success. In compliance with the Section 1118 of Title1, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), we have developed this policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. P.S. 160 works to foster an environment for our students that enables them to reach their full potential while at the same time instilling a love of learning and education. We institute and consistently maintain systems, programs and policies which allow our parents, the school and the community to function as full partners. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students P. S. 160 will Encourage parental involvement in the planning stages of parental programs and activities as regulated by the Title 1. This will include convening an annual meeting to: a). Explain to parents the requirements of these laws in simple, direct and understandable terms. b). Inform parents of the school’s participation in such programs, and include them, in an organized and timely fashion, in the planning, review, improvement and revision of such programs as mandated by law and regulation. P.S. 160 is looking to continue taking our relationship with our parents, as well as, with the community to the next level. The key to doing this is facilitating and maintaining active parental involvement. In doing so, P.S. 160 commits to: Parental Involvement and School Quality 1) Planning, implementing, assessing, and, as necessary, revising effective parent involvement activities aimed at improving student academic achievement and school performance. 2) )Building the school’s and the parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement 0  through collaborative school-parent planning, ongoing parent-school communication, and integration of parents into professional development and other school activities. 3) Encouraging parental involvement in the planning stages of parental programs and activities as regulated by the Title 1, Title lll, Title lV and theElementarythe elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA) legislation. This will include convening an annual meeting to: a). Explain to parents the requirements of these laws in simple, direct and understandable terms. b). Inform parents of the school’s participation in such programs, and include them, in an organized and timely fashion, in the planning, review, improvement and revision of such programs as mandated by law and regulation. c). Explain and answer any questions as to the rights of the parents to be informed about and involved in these programs. 4) Informing and explaining to parents the New York City, New York State & Federal standards students are expected to meet; how students’ progress is measured, as well as provide information regarding the Common Core Standards curriculum currently in use at the school. 5) Informing and providing the parents with any training and materials available for them to help them work with their children. 6) Informing parents of any resources, such as transportation and child care, which may be available in order to allow them to attend and participate in school events. 7) Informing them of and bring to the parents any other programs available through community resources, which may be of use or interest to them, whenever possible. 8) Including in its Parental Involvement Policy a School-Parent Compact, a written agreement outlining and describing more specifically the rights, and 1  responsibilities and commitments of the parents, the children and the school with regard to honoring their partnership roles in helping the students realize their maximum academic, personal and social potential. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 1. By providing to the parents alternate means of communicating their concerns and suggestions, including but not limited to: 1. Parent/Teacher Connection Questionnaire 2. An open door policy to the Parent Coordinator, Principal, and Assistant Principals e.g. Monthly Parent Roundtable meetings. 3. Extended Day Tuesdays- Parent/Teacher Conversations 2. By providing technical support, training, professional development, especially in developing leadership skills through partnerships with organizations such as Learning Leaders, as well as our own in house instructional leads. Working in tandem with them to provide workshops in literacy, Common Core Standards, NYS ELA & Math Test Sophistication, understanding educational accountability grade curriculum and assessment expectations and training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home. 3. By providing all parents with a copy of this Parent Involvement Policy, in English and other appropriate 4. languages, and its inherent School-Compact component. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact We, the administrators, teachers, staff, and parents of P.S. 160 fully recognize our shared responsibility for supporting our student’s academic success, educationally, socially and personally. We commit to supplying the foundational tools needed to help them realize their full potential as unique individuals helping them to become respectful, tolerant, responsible productive contributing citizens. We hereby pledge to each other and to our students to provide the support and model the expected behaviors by voluntarily signing the agreement stated in this document. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum  using academic learning time efficiently;   respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 2   offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships P.S. 160 shall accomplish these goals through the following means: 1) By convening regular meetings, at times facilitating greatest parental participation, at which parents will be able to gain information, voice opinions, and offer approval or rejection of proposed programs and policies. These shall include the following meetings: 1. Monthly meetings of the general PTA membership 2. Monthly meetings of the School Leadership Team 3. Meetings of any standing PTA committees 4. Meetings of any parental action committees as formed in accordance with PTA by-laws 5. Meetings called by the Parent Coordinator in order to maintain open communication with the parents and monitor their concerns, interests, and needs such as: Our Monthly Parent Roundtable Meetings and workshops. 2) By establishing various forms of clear and consistent communication with the parents, through the distribution of flyers, the Parent 411 Newsletter, The Walt Disney website, Parent Handbook and the Global Connect Messenger system, parents will be encouraged regularly to partake in discussions about school programs, students’ academic progress and behavior management. Such communication shall be provided in alternative formats and languages as necessary, and shall stress the importance of communication between the teachers and parents through: 1. Regular attendance of parent-teacher conferences; 2. Reports to parents on their child’s progress, e.g. Bi-weekly progress reports    conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  3   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year;  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences;  Reasonable access to staff, opportunities to volunteer in their child’s class and observe classroom activities; e.g. Learning Leaders (volunteer opportunities), Learning Walks (fall & spring), and Parental Workshops etc. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; The Parent/Guardian Agrees To: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  Discuss the Discipline Code and the Bill of Rights and Responsibilities with my child.  Discuss P.S. 160’s PBIS Positive Behavior Expectations.   Participate in parent conferences, class programs and other activities in which my child is involved. Show respect for my child, his/her teacher and the school. 4   Support and model positive attitudes towards school and learning (by showing interest in my child’s education by attending at least 3 workshops and /or PTA meetings not including the 4 Parent Teacher Conferences , reading and limiting my own TV viewing etc.) Assure that my child arrives to school on time every day in uniform and prepared with the required supplies to work. Keep an open dialogue with my child about his/her school activities each day.  Provide a quiet space for my child to do his/her homework while providing the necessary supplies to complete his/her assignments.  Ensure that my child will complete all: daily homework assignments, monthly reports and all science & social studies projects on time.  Communicate regularly with my child’s teacher and make sure I am advised of all academic & behavioral expectations my child is responsible for meeting. Be responsible for reviewing and signing all communication that is sent home with my child e.g. Weekly progress reports and all notices.  Make sure my child observes school rules within the classroom and the entire building that are set by his/her teacher, the principal and the Dept. of Education.  Be available to assist my child by: Checking his/her book bag and homework folder daily, reviewing completed assignments, notices, all school information that is sent home, seeking out opportunities to volunteer, support the school in developing positive behaviors and implementing school policies & procedures.  Read to my child and encourage him/her to read independently daily, also monitoring my child’s TV viewing, video game and online activities. Ensure that they receive adequate and appropriate nutrition and sleep daily.  Provide the school with current/active telephone numbers and emergency contact information. Notify the school’s office of any changes in address or contact information immediately.  Alert the school if there are any significant changes in my child’s health or well being that may affect his/her ability to perform in school. We, the students of P.S. 160, recognize and accept our own responsibility for achieving academic success, social development and personal development. We fully recognize our responsibility in developing into respectful, tolerant, responsible productive contributing members of our families, school and world community. We hereby pledge our commitment to fulfilling that responsibility to the best of our ability, by signing the agreement stated below. The Student Agrees To: III. Student Responsibilities  Demonstrate the 3B’s of P.S. 160: 1) Be Respectful, 2) Be Tolerant, 3) Be Responsible through positive behavior and following the positive expectations of the school at all times while continuing these principles at home and outside in the community. 5  Come to school daily, dressed in uniform, on time and prepared to work with all required supplies.  Believe that I can and will learn.  Always do my best in my work and my behavior.  Complete and return all assignments on time.  Participate and ask questions if I do not understand school or homework assignments.  Take pride in my work and read at least 30 minutes daily outside of school.  Give to my parents/guardians all notices and information received by me from my school everyday. Tear Off Please sign and return to school: I have received a copy of the Discipline Code, Bill of Students Rights and Responsibilities, and the P.S. 160 PBIS Positive Behavior Expectations and understand the behavior that is required of my child. I understand that my participation in my child’s education will help him/her to be successful in school. I have read this agreement and I will carry out the responsibilities listed above to the best of my ability. I am aware that participation in any of the extracurricular activities, PBIS incentive programs, and 5th Grade senior activities are contingent upon the agreement of parental involvement and student commitment to the guidelines outlined in this Parent Involvement Policy and Student-Parent Compact; understanding that any student who does not show adequate respect of the policies of P.S. 160 will not be allowed to participate in any of the events listed above. ___________________________________ _____________ Parent/ Guardian’s Signature Date 6  ___________________________________ ____________ Students Signature Date 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name The Walt Disney School Borough Bronx School Number 160 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ms. Lori Baker Coach Ms. Daniella Rocco ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Milagros Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Lauren Navarro Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Ms. Patricia Currier Superintendent Ms. Meisha Ross Porter Assistant Principal Ms. Katherine Atiles Coach Ms. Michele Lynch School Counselor Mr. Joseph John Parent Ms. Shekinah Sayers Parent Coordinator Ms. Kwafi Gray Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 410 8 Total number of ELLs 27 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.59%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The formative assessments or curriculum assessment used to guide instructional planning for ELL’s are the following: TCRWP – Running records which assesses decoding and comprehension skills.It determines Fountas and Pinnell levels. Grades K-5 reading assessment tools tests the students’ accuracy and self correction, comprehension and fluency.The students’ ability is measured in comprehension and answering literal and inferential questions after they read a story.The student may respond to questions in numerous ways, but is acceptable only as long as the response for the questions demonstrates the students’ understanding.The running records or oral reading has a set of conventions for coding reading errors: substitution, self corrections, repetitions, omission, insertion, sounding out, and spelling words.K-2 students are tested on concepts of print, phonemic awareness, recognition of letters, sounds, and words. TC Writing – Baselines are administered to determine present levels. GoMath – Beginning of Year assessments are used to determine present levels of assessment. I-Ready – Diagnostic assessment administered to determine the present level of performance. 9  Formative assessments are ongoing within homeroom and ENL classrooms using teacher created assessments, rubrics and checklists. The analysis of data is used to formulate differentiated activities for small groups during intervention or enrichment periods. The differentiated activities target areas of need. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Classroom teachers administer the TCRWP in September as well as the NYC Performance Task in math baseline in order to determine their present levels of understanding. Once the levels have been determined, students are then grouped accordingly for differentiated learning activities. The ENL teacher will push into classes to aide differentiated instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? #3 Summative assessments include NYC performance tasks Baseline/ Benchmarks in math, GoMath, project based assessments, and the E.L.L. Periodic Assessments, in combination with the TCRWP Running Records.The data will provide important insights about the students' literacy and math skills as they progress towards English proficiency. For example, if it is determined that ELL students are reading on TCRWP F& P level D, the instructional plan would be phonics based. The assessment data also provides information about ELLs meeting the Common Core standards. The data will drive instruction in that it will allow the teacher to design lessons based on student needs allowing for differentiation/scaffolding appropriately. Additional evidence of success for ELLs may also be measured by performance based tasks, such as:• Accurate paraphrase of what is heard or read• Following directions that involve multiple steps• Using concept maps, semantic webs, or outlines to organize information• Producing a summary of information found in biography, text books• Using facts and data from articles• Writing essays for content areas• Using technical terms correctly• Producing flow charts and diagrams that show relationships among information 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data from sources such as the NYS, ELA, NYS Math, NYSESLAT, EDAT, TC Reading Assessment, NYC Performance Task in Math, E.L.L. Periodic Assessment and GoMath are gathered by the Data Specialist and ENL teacher. It is analyzed in order to determine interventions necessary for ENL students.The ENL teacher articulates results to classroom teachers. Based upon the data results, students are placed in intervention or enrichment groups within their classrooms. Classroom/ENL teachers provide interventions or enrichments strategies that are targeted to the areas which need improvement. The ENL will further group students into modalities (speaking, listening, reading, writing) for intervention/ enrichment purposes. If students have not made sufficient progress within a 6 week time frame, classroom/ ENL teachers present student information to the Response to Intervention Team. At such time, the Response to Intervention Team will recommend additional supports (i.e. After-School Academic Intervention Programs, Academic Intervention Supports in ENL, At-Risk SETSS,) depending upon the need of the student. The team will discuss the progress of the student in approximately 4 weeks in order to determine if additional supports are necessary. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P.S. 160 recently created a Data Team. The Data Team has been charged with gathering and analyzing assessment data from sources such as the NYS ELA, NYS Math, NYSESLAT, and/or unit tests from reading/math curricula. The analysis is then provided to classroom teachers as well as the ENL teacher. RTI Tier 1 RTI is an instructional model that provides prevention and interventions through a tiered system of instructional support to the standard core curriculum used at the school. At P.S. 160 the results of the data analysis are used by classroom / ENL teachers to tailor interventions and/or enrichment 0  lessons for small groups and/or individual students since it targets their specific needs. RTI Tier 2 and 3 P.S. 160 created the Response to Intervention Team (RTI Team). The RTI Team meets weekly. The ENL teacher is a member of the team. Classroom teachers of English language learners who continue to score below specified levels of performance, present student work (which includes additional analysis of classroom data) to the RTI team. Members of the RTI Team will determine the additional support services to provide the student, taking into consideration evidence such as the following: The interventions which follow are used by classroom teachers, ENL teacher and/or the Academic Intervention Teacher: I Ready is an adaptive diagnostic computer based program. It specifically targets sub-skills needed for student achievement. Fundations is a multi sensory, structured language program which emphasizes: Phonemic awareness High frequency words Vocabulary Reading fluency Guided Reading, writing, and/or math is designed to provide small group instruction in developing reading, writing, and/or math proficiency. GoMath is a K-8 mathematics program which contains differentiated instructional resources including RTI Tier 2 activities for struggling learners. Teachers’ College Writing Program develops students’ skills within the writing process.Students receive direct instruction in collecting, drafting, revising, editing and publishing well developed narrative/ expository texts. The support services provided are aligned to PS 160's Academic Intervention Services that the school is already providing to all students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data from the 2017 NYS ELA, 2017 NYS Math, 2017 NYSESLAT via the RLAT as well as the 2016 E.L.L. Periodic Assessment are analyzed and provided by the Data Specialist and ENL teacher to classroom teachers. Data is disaggregated by subgroups, such as ELLs and Students with Disabilities. Using the results of 2017 NYSESLAT via the RLAT report, it was determined that the area of focus should be reading and writing. According to the RLAT: 31% of students scored within the Entering through Emerging proficiency levels. 100% of students had their lowest performing scores in writing. 23% of ELL’s were new admits in 2016-2017 school year (predominantly Kindergarten).They scored within the Emerging through Expanding levels. According to the 2017 NYS ELA/ NYS Math data: There was an 7% decrease from 2016 to 2017 in performance level 1in all grades in ELA There was an 8% increase from 2016 to 2017 in performance levels 3 and 4 in all grades in ELA. There was an 2% decrease from 2016 to 2017 in performance level 1 in all grades in math. There was an 7% increase from 2016 to 2017 in performance levels 3 and 4 in all grades in math. 31% of ELL students in grades 3-5 are students with disabilities.On the NYS Math exam, there was a 1% decrease from 2016 to 2017 in performance level 1.There was an 5% increase from 2016 to 2017 in performance levels 3 and 4. Based upon the above information, the ENL teacher will implement writing strategies such as modeled and guided writing adhering to the writing process, the use of graphic organizers to plan writing, contextualizing vocabulary, exclusive brainstorming, and note taking. These writing strategies will guide students in their writing to state a claim and provide evidence based upon the text. Reading and writing are the areas in which the students need improvement. The ENL teacher will continue to use strategies such as close reading, read alouds using texts from multiple genres, guided reading, scaffolded retelling, and rephrasing of concepts. 1  P.S. 160 is a barrier-free school servicing students with special needs. Currently, there are 9 ELLs out of 27 in Special education. Some of them have multiple handicaps who receive other mandated services, such as Adaptive Physical Education, Occupational Therapy, Physical Therapy, Speech and Guidance, while others are in functional classes on Alternate Assessment. These are the students who struggle with language acquisition and processing because of their learning disabilities, or are intellectually challenged as the case would be. Instruction is based on the Individual Education Plan (IEP). Differentiated Instruction is employed and activities are tailored according to their age, experience, abilities and skills to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English Language development. All ELL students on Alternate Assessment are given equal opportunities to be exposed to skill/test sophistication. P.S. 160 has taken the option of administering the ELL Periodic Assessments to evaluate their progress and for preparedness for the mandated NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During the opening conference, the Data Specialist provides staff with present levels of performance regarding the NYS ELA, NYS Math and NYSESLAT. Data is disaggregated by grade, gender, ethnicity and ELL status. ELL students are then programmed into STARS Classroom based upon their proficiency levels as follows: Entering: 180 minutes standalone ENL; 180 minutes integrated ENL/ ELA block Emerging: 90 minutes standalone ENL; 180 minutes integrated ENL/ ELA block Transitioning: 90 minutes standalone ENL (P.S. 160 requirement); 90 minutes integrated ENL/ ELA block Expanding: 180 minutes integrated ENL/ ELA or other content area Commanding: 90 minutes integrated ENL/ ELA or other content area The monthly ELL Data Update Report is used to ensure that all ELL’s are programmed in STARS Classroom according to their proficiency levels. Any inaccuracies are address immediately in STARS Classroom as well as within the ENL schedule. Classroom teachers are provided with ENL strategies by the ENL teacher and Data Specialist and incorporate those strategies through small group instruction as well as during whole group questioning Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Freestanding ENL Program The population of ELL’s at P.S. 160 has reached 26 at this time of reporting. The students range in grade levels from K- 5. As per CR Part 154, the certified English as a New Language service provider (teacher) delivers the Freestanding ENL as both a stand-alone model and as an integrated approach model. At P.S. 160, the certified ENL service provider, Ms. Milagros Rodriguez (teacher) provides instruction as follows: Stand-alone ENL develops English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses.Ms. Rodriguez, the certified ENL service provider, groups students based upon proficiency levels.At times, the certified ENL service provider may deliver the Stand-alone model based upon content area need which would create heterogeneous grouping. Integrated approach model builds English language skills through content area instruction.It is delivered by the certified ENL teacher in conjunction with the classroom teacher, who is certified in Common Branches. b. TBE program. If applicable. 2  N/A: c. DL program. If applicable. N/A: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELLs in grades K-5 in both General Education and Special education are grouped in consideration of their grade level and level of proficiency. They are served with the mandated instructional units required as per CR Part 154.2. The certified ENL service provider, Ms. Milagros Rodriguez, provides all ENL mandated instruction to all ELLs. P.S. 160 students who are at the Entering proficiency level will receive 2 units of student per week (360 min.). The students will receive 1 unit of study (180 min.) of stand-alone ENL and 1 unit of study (180 min) in ENL/ ELA. Students who are at the Emerging proficiency level will also receive 2 units of study (360 min) in ENL instruction. At the Emerging proficiency level students will receive .5 unit of study (90 min) in ENL in the stand-alone ENL model and 1 unit of study (180 min) in ENL/ ELA in the integrated approach model. There is flexibility at the Emerging level in that .5 unit of study (90 min) can be stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL/ content area. Students at the Transitioning level of proficiency will receive 1 unit of study per week (180 min). These students will receive .5 unit of study (90 min) in ENL/ ELA and .5 unit study (90 min) can be stand-alone ENL or integrated ENL/ content area. Students at the Expanding level will receive 1 unit of study (180 min) per week of integrated ENL instruction. Former ELLs or students that have reached the Commanding level of proficiency continue to receive services for an additional 2 years. These students require .5 units of study per week in integrated ENL in ELA or content area, or other approved services. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. # 3. To ensure that ELLs meet the standards, the ENL program is aligned with the Common Core Curriculum, NYS Common Core Standards and ENL state standards. P.S. 160 is making strides to be consistent with the Common Core Learning Standards following the framework in ELA and Math to prepare the students for college. ENL methodologies such as the SIOP Model, as well as strategies of Balanced Literacy, Balanced Mathematics, Science and Social Studies are used to ensure comprehensive growth. Balanced Literacy focuses on Reading Workshop (mini-lesson, shared reading, guided reading and independent reading), TC Writing Workshop (modeled writing, guiding writing, interactive writing and independent writing), and Word Work (phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary and comprehension). To make content comprehensible in subject areas such as social studies and science, academic vocabulary building and reading comprehension strategies are employed. Learning to write essays using document based questions is given emphasis in ENL social studies. Fourth graders who take the science test are provided activities that allow them to follow directions in performing experiments. Math vocabulary and understanding word problems are thoroughly worked on. Glossaries in social studies, science and math are utilized in the ENL classroom. Books are leveled and designated as emergent, early, and fluent in the ENL program. Also included in the ENL library are books in English and Spanish in different genres that portray a wide variety of cultural and ethnic backgrounds and are used for independent reading. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? # 4. Several students from grades 3-5 took the NYS Math exam in Spanish, Arabic and Twi. For languages that are not one of the 8 covered languages from the NYC DOE, an oral interpreter was secured. Should there be new admits to the school this year, alternate language tests and/or an oral interpreter will be provided. Sample tests in math, science, and social studies in the students language are available and utilized. Spanish and Arabic glossaries are at their disposal. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 3  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status # 5. Differentiating for ELL subgroups:Differentiated instruction and approaches are used for all ELL subgroups. ENL instruction in all subgroups (Newcomers, SIFEDeveloping, Long Term and Former ELLs) consist of students participating in activities that require the following with consideration of their proficiency level, language acquisition, abilities and skills:* To formulate, ask and answer questions to provide information and meaning* To present information in clear, oral and graphic forms, apply learning strategies and make oral and written texts comprehensible and meaningful in differentiated instruction.* Students are encouraged to identify key elements in texts and relate these features to the students experiences. * Students are engaged in a variety of student groupings to discuss/share experiences, ideas, information and opinions.* Students share cross cultural experiences/ ideas with others.a. Instructional plan for SIFE: There is one SIFE student at P.S. 160 this year. Presently the SIFE student is in a monolingual class. The classroom teacher and ENL teacher collaborate to plan instructional strategies in reading specifically in vocabulary development and close reading which is aligned to grade level content. The student receives differentiated academic intervention in ELA daily from the classroom teacher as well as from the ENL teacher. b. Plan for newcomers and ELLs with 3 years or less: New arrivals with little or no English are placed in monolingual classes whose classroom teachers, or at least class paraprofessional are Spanish speaking. Gradually, this support is reduced. A non-threatening learning environment is created for oral communication. Speaking and listening will lead to reading and writing. The classroom and ENL teachers articulate with each other to plan instruction to enable new students in making content comprehensible and to monitor their progress. ELLs who have less than 3 years are emersed in vocabulary activities to reinforce oral and writing skills. Decoding skills are emphasized. Strategies in reading comprehension are developed. There is the scaffolding of the scope of content and concepts. Students are moved toward task oriented practices where reading independently and writing for expression take root. They are supported using audio/visual/ hands on lesson activities. c. Plan for ELLs with 4 -6 years: The ENL teacher will employ strategies so that the nature of the students' cognitive and academic demands are increased. While reading for information and understanding is important, reading for critical analysis and evaluation is also developed. Writing for different purposes is fine tuned. Reading and writing in various genres and the content areas should demonstrate growth. The performance indicators will be met through constant practice activities. d. Plan for Long Term ELL's: The ENL teacher will utilize strategies to support ELL's in reading comprehension. The ENL teacher will use multiple representations to improve vocabulary development and provide a rich print environment. Guided reading practices will be employed to assist students further develop their English Language acquisition. Presently, we do not have long term ELL'se. Former ELL's up to two years after exiting ELL status: Support is extended to those ELLs who exited out of the ENL program. All former ELL's up to two years after exiting ELL status must receive a minimum number of units of integrated ENL. For at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, former ELLs receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a new language (90 minutes per week) and are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? P.S. 160 is a barrier free school serving students with disabilities. Currently there are 9 ELLs in special education ( self contained classes and/or have related services). Some students have multiple handicaps who receive other mandated services, such as Adaptive Physical Education, Vision services, occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech and language therapy and guidance services. Other students with disabilities are in functional classes who take alternate assessments. These students struggle with language acquisition and processing because of their learning disabilities or are intellectually challenged as the case would be. Instruction is based upon the individualized education plan. Differentiated instruction is employed and activities are tailored according to their age, experience, abilities and skills to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development. All ELL students on alternate assessment are given equal opportunities to be exposed to the periodic assessment. P.S. 160 has taken the option of administering the E.L.L Periodic Assessments to evaluate their progress and for preparedness for the mandated NYSESLAT. 4  Students with disabilities in grades K-5 follow the same common core aligned curriculum as their general education counterparts. Teachers of students with disabilities employ strategies which include scaffolding and differentiated activities. P.S. 160 has decided to follow the STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, Math) framework. The curriculum embeds project based learning which is an effective way to develop deeper learning and critical thinking skills. The classroom teacher in conjunction with the ENL teacher use grade level materials, within small groups, in order to support ELLs who are students with disabilities. The grade level (K-5) materials include: Fundations – supports students phonemic awareness, vocabulary development, reading fluency, high frequency words. GoMath – provides tiered activities to support struggling learners in math. TC Writing – individualized instruction on the writing process. Guided Reading – small grouping of students through their Fountas and Pinell reading level. Each group receives targeted instruction based upon need. Leveled appropriate books and materials are carefully chosen for use in differentiated instruction, without sacrificing academic content Turn and Talk – During whole group/ small group turn and talk discussions, students develop oral language by expressing themselves making their thinking visible.This allows teachers to provide clarifications regarding students’ misconceptions. I-Ready –adaptive diagnostic program which targets individual needs. Assessments – In addition to state mandated assessments, teachers will create their own assessments. Teacher developed assessments are not one size fits all, but created to measure the individual child’s annual and short term go 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? # 7. Articulation with the classroom teacher and all the related service providers is critical at P.S. 160 in allowing for flexibility in scheduling, as well as in monitoring the student's instructional needs and progress. The ENL teacher provides services to SWD's in a stand alone ENL program and integrated ENL approach based on student disabilities. The ENL teachers encourages one to one paraprofessionals or alternate placement paraprofessionals to participate in supporting the ELL SWD's academic and language development. To maximize time spent with non-disabled peers who exhibit differing needs and strengths, the ENL teacher is encouraged to use student performance data from interim assessments to plan instruction and differentiate learning and teaching. The ENL teacher plans with the general education teachers to ensure curricular alignment and target grade level standards. Academic content area instruction is taught using ENL strategies. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. # 8. ELLs identified at risk receive the following intervention on individual and/or small group in order to meet their needs:*Special Education Support Services (SETTS)* Response To Intervention in Literacy and Math *I-Ready* Academic Intervention Services (AIS)Instructional materials in the intervention programs are specific to ELA, Math, and other content areas. Some of the materials in use are: In Focus grade K-5 in ELA and Math, and NYS Progress Coach K-5 in ELA and Math, I-Ready, and Scaffolded Support for English Language Learners.Transitional support is extended to those ELLs who exit out of ENL. To facilitate their transition into the mainstream curriculum, they are provided comprehensive reading and writing opportunities. The ENL teacher continues to articulate with the teachers of those on the Commanding Level to encourage them to use ENL strategies in the content areas. Students on the Commanding Level are provided a minimum number of units of study per week (90 min.) of integrated ENL /ELA for up to 2 years of exiting the ENL program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? # 9. P.S. 160 will continue to assess students in determining their needs to create programs to support all our ELLs/SWDs. An integrated ENL approach will also ensure the alignment of NYS Common Core Standards and ENL State Standards for all ELLs. Moving forward, in the 2017-2018, PS 160 will implement TC Reading alongside TC Writing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? # 10. No program will be discontinued for ELLs. 5  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. # 11. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. The services and resources correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The following are the supplemental services offered that ELLs participate in:* ELA and Math -After School Program- held on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30pm -4:00pm for Grades 3-5* Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETTS) for Grades 1-5 *The Arts residencies throughout the year. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. # 12. Books and Materials used in the ENL Program assist ELLs in all levels in reaching the academic levels expected in the standards. *Books for Literacy are appropriate and designated Emergent, Early, and Fluent.*Empire State NYSESLAT- Continental Press*Finish Line in ELA/ Reading – Continental Press* Fiction/ Nonfiction class Library*Finish Line in Math – Continental PressIn the past, Title III gave an allotted amount for books and materials that our school purchased for ELLs including software for reading and vocabulary. Also included in the ENL classroom are books in Spanish in different genres that portray a wide variety of cultural experience and ethnic backgrounds. These books are mostly used for guided and independent reading. These are specifically helpful in supporting student’s native language. They are also available on loan for students to take home. Smartboard technology is utilized throughout instruction. Students are given ample opportunity to learn to research or gather facts/information from recommended websites. All students may use the computer to complete assigned writing activities to build technological skills, as well as keyboarding. Selected software provide an endless variety of vocabulary, comprehension, grammar and math skills within the ENL and official classrooms. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? # 13. The ENL Program supports Home language to all ELL students. New arrivals that have little to no English are placed in monolingual classes with Spanish-speaking support. This helps the students feel comfortable in the new setting and they are given support in their home language. Gradually, this support is reduced. A non-threatening environment is created for oral communication. The classroom teacher and ENL teacher articulate with each other to plan instruction in order to enable the new students to make content comprehensible and to monitor progress. Also included in the ENL classroom are books in Spanish in different genres that portray a wide variety of cultural experience and ethnic backgrounds. Cultural books are mostly used for guided and independent reading. These are specifically helpful in supporting students' native language. They are also available on loan for students to take home. Smartboard technology is utilized throughout instruction. Students are given ample opportunity to learn to research or gather facts/information from recommended websites. All students may use the computer to complete assigned writing activities to build technological skills, as well as keyboarding. Selected software provide an endless variety of vocabulary, comprehension, grammar and math skills within the ENL and official classroom. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. # 14. Required services support and resources correspond to ELL’s ages and grade levels. Related services, such as Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy, Adapted Physical Therapy, Speech, and Guidance that are required of ELLs in Special Education design instruction and activities suited to their ages and grade levels. The After- School Program and SETSS provide supplementary instruction and intervention that are age and grade-appropriate to meet their educational needs. Resources and materials used correspond to ELL’s age and grade levels. Differentiated instruction is also employed to best support ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? P.S. 160 is a co-located building. The P.S. 160 campus is comprised of the following schools: P.S. 160x – a NYC DOE elementary school P.S. 168x – a District 75 NYC DOE elementary school Equality Charter School – a Charter middle school At the P.S. 160 campus, we share common spaces such as the auditorium, cafeteria and gymnasium. Resources such as books and materials are not shared amongst schools. 6  Part IV. C. Under section ‘Additional Information’ add The certified ENL teacher maintains copies of all records, including the following: Parent/ Staff meeting agendas Sign In sheets Parent letters (i.e. Parent choice, entitlement/ discontinuance of services) Home Language surveys 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). # 16. Newly arrived ELLs who enroll throughout the school year participate in activities that may include:1. Becoming familiar with the environment by taking a tour of the school2. The assignment of a class buddy3. Building a rapport with staff member who speak their native language4. Expressing their feelings regarding their new environment using all four modalities 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? # 17. No language objectives are offered to ELLs at P.S. 160. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? # 18. N/A to P.S. 160 Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? # 1 P.S. 160 has regularly scheduled professional learning time on Mondays from 2:20PM - 3:40PM. As referred to in the EPRG-All teachers and paraprofessionals are given formal and informal training as to the nature of working with ELLs. This is accomplished through grade level, individual conferencing, and articulation with teachers, and designated workshop days as well as attending courses or seminars to complete the required hours of ENL training. Teachers are made aware of testing modifications and promotional criteria for ELLs. Secretaries and the parent coordinator also receive professional development regarding their role in assisting ELLs and their parents. The ENL teacher and classroom teachers attend training, workshops, and seminars conducted by The Office of English Language Learners and recommended by the principal. Each week The Office of English Language Learners and Student Support sends out the latest e-blast informing administrators and ENL teachers of the News and Opportunities for educators of ELLs. Professional Development for teachers of ELLs have included, but are not limited to:1. Response to Intervention and the Work of the Multidisciplinary Team2. Close Reading for English Language Learners3. Building a Strong and Effective Tier I Reading Instruction for English Language Learners in the Responsive to Intervention Framework4. Scoring the NYSESLAT Training Workshop5. Collaborative-Co-Teaching: Integrating Content and Language Instruction 6. Aligning ENL Curriculum with The NYS Common Core Curriculum and Common Core Standards7. ENL Strategies on Integrating Language and Content 7  Instruction for English Language Learners 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. # 2. P.S. 160 will provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically address the needs of English language learners. Ms. M. Rodriguez, the certified ENL teacher will provide the professional development. A minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development hours for all teachers will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on integrating language and content instruction for English language learners within all content areas. Professional development for teachers will occur every fourth Monday of each month. For the English as a new language teacher, a minimum of fifty percent of the required professional development hours will be dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners within all content areas. The ENL teacher will attend two professional development sessions per month provided by the Office of English Language Learners. All records and proof of professional development will be maintained in the teachers' professional development binders. Professional development hours are approved by administration, Ms. Lori Baker, Principal, and Ms. Katherine Atiles, Assistant Principal, and agendas are kept on file in the main office as proof of attendance. Turnkey meetings are also scheduled with administration if the professional development did not occur within the school building. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The certified ENL service provider will meet with parents/ guardians individually of English Language Learners at least one time per year. The ENL will arrange individual appointments, have agendas and sign in sheets. The Mid Year conference will occur in January of every year. It is in addition to regularly scheduled parent conferences which occur in September, November, March and May. During the Mid Year Conference, the certified ENL teacher discusses the following: Goals of the ENL program Language development progress Language proficiency assessment results Language development needs in content areas During the Mid Year Conference, content area teachers may attend the individual meetings in order to inform parents of their child's’ development. The Mid Year Conference is conducted in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. The certified ENL teacher is fluent in Spanish and therefore, interpretation services is not required. However, for other languages such as Arabic, NYC DOE staff (including Ms. Rodriguez – ENL teacher) have access to the NYC DOE Language Line. The NYC DOE Language Line provides interpretation services in over 200 languages, 24 hours a day, 7 days per week. The ENL teacher keeps in communication with parents of ELL students via: Parent engagement time (Tuesdays from 2:20pm – 3:00pm). Schools’ website at www.thewaltdisneyschool.org. The ENL teacher keeps continuous communication between the parents of ELL’s, parent coordinator and classroom teachers in order to get feedback regarding the academic areas that parents have determined are in need of progress. Parents have the ability to address their concerns to the ENL teacher daily/ weekly. Parents of ELLs are encouraged to attend monthly Parent Roundtable meetings. Most parents bring relatives that speak English to parent meetings. At parent request, a language interpreter is made available during the meeting through the NYC DOE Language Line. 8  Translated Documents Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. # 2Parents are the sole determinants of the ELL programs their children receive, initially and in subsequent years. Schools must notify parents of their child’s eligibility for ELL services and provide information and program selection through parent orientations (in the parents’ preferred languages). After parents are informed of all three program models at the parent orientation, schools must provide parents with a Parent Survey & Program Selection Form (in the parents’ preferred language), where parents can indicate their program choice. The parent must return the completed and signed form within 5 school calendar days. The ENL teacher must document and include attempts to gather initial parent selection preference; documentation should be maintained in each ELL students' cumulative binder/folder. At P.S. 160 the Pupil Secretary is responsible for entering parent choice as indicated on the Parent Survey & Program Selection Form in the designated screen in ATS (ELPC) as forms are completed. The parent’s first choice should be entered as noted on the selection form, regardless of whether that choice is currently offered at the school. The Parent Survey & Program Selection Form is a formal record of the parent’s preference of ELL program for their child, and must be retained in the student’s permanent record and accessible for State or City audits and reviews. A copy of the completed Parent Survey & Program Selection Form can be provided to the parent upon request.Once a month the ENL teacher sends home a progress report informing parents of their child's progress. Parents are asked to sign and return their child's report and it is kept in the students' ENL cumulative binder. Parents are encouraged to comment on the monthly progress report ensuring ongoing communication between the parents and the ENL teacher.Parental involvement is very crucial. Parental involvement includes a wide range, but generally refers to parents' and family members' use and investment in their children's schooling with the support of the Parent Coordinator. These investments can take place in or outside of school with the intention of improving the ELLs' learning.Parental involvement at home can include activities such as discussions about school, helping with homework, and reading with children. Spanish books are available in the ENL classroom library and students and parents are welcomed to borrow them. Websites are provided for parent use with their children (i.e. Dial a Teacher.)Involvement at school include parents volunteering in the classroom, attending workshops, or attending school plays and sporting events. At the ENL Orientation in September parents are provided information on the ELL program and the different services and support that are available at P.S.160. The Parent Coordinator encourages parents to participate in the following: * Parent Association * School Leadership Team * I.E.P. Conferences * Parent-Teacher Conferences * Parents' Meetings and Workshops( conducted by the parent coordinator or Literacy /Math coaches) * ELL Parent Orientation * ELL Midyear Conference * Family Day * Barbeque Day and Field Day * Assembly programs * FundraisingAt P.S. 160 there is continuous dialogue between the parent/guardian, parent coordinator, and the ENL teacher in order to get feedback in which areas parents feel their children need help, while at the same time giving insight on how parents can be helped. Adult programs that offer English language instruction are also offered. Parents of ELLs are encouraged to attend Parent Monthly Roundtable, and if necessary, a language interpreter is made available to listen to their concerns and issues.Parent-Teacher Conferences are held periodically and parents are allowed to explore the ENL classroom library where they may borrow books. Informational flyers from D.O.E. and our school are distributed addressing how the school can be of assistance in helping the parents. Some are available in different languages to best convey the message to non-English speaking parents. The ENL teacher will individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings/phone calls or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This additional meeting should include school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child’s language development in all content areas in English. Such meeting is conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. At P.S. 160 the Principal determines the manner and form of individual parent meetings, in accordance with collective bargaining agreements. The ENL teacher records attendance using existing procedures. 9  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The certified ENL teacher maintains copies of all records, including the following: Records are kept in a binder which is updated throughout the year as needed. The binder is in a file cabinet which is located in the ENL classroom. 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lori Baker, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 160 The Walt Disney School School DBN: 11 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ms. Lori Baker Title Principal Ms. Katherine Atiles Assistant Principal Ms. Kwafi Gray Parent Coordinator Ms. Milagros Rodriguez ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A N/A N/A Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Daniela Rocco Ms. Michele Lynch Coach Coach Mr. Joseph John School Counselor N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 10/29/15 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x160 School Name: The Walt Disney School Superintendent: J. Kabinoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kwafi Gray Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school.  During the registration process, parents complete the Home Language Identification survey. The survey states the parents preferred mode of spoken and written communication. Results of the Home Language Survey is entered into ATS. The original survey is entered into the student's cumulative record which is distributed to the student's classroom teacher. Classroom teachers are made aware of written and oral interpretation needs through the HLIS.  ATS Reports - The RCPL and RAPL reports show the preferred written/oral languages of parents.  Emergency Contact Cards - During the registration process, parents are given an Emergency contact card.  Parents list their preferred language of written/oral communication. Teachers receive copies of the Emergency cards. Information from the Emergency cards updates the ATS report RAPL. Surveys - Parent surveys are conducted to determine parents preferred mode of communications during various events. Findings from all sources are shared in the P.S. 160 school newsletter, PTA functions, staff professional learning and School Leadership Team meetings. Spanish is predominantly the language 3  spoken by limited English speaking parents at P.S. 160. There are various staff personnel that can assist with translation and/or interpretation services. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic English Spanish 1 342 23 0.26% 94.13% 5.38% 1 341 24 0.26% 94.13% 5.38% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A as of September 12, 2018. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families P.S. 160 Protocol September/October 2018 procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. 4  Afterschool Information September 2018 New York State Testing Dates April, May, and June 2019 Parent Teacher Conference Announcements October 30, 2018 February 28, 2019 We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a 5  Various Parent Workshops September 2018 - June 2019 Middle School Information October 2018 Website has translation feature July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019 translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. 6  Various English as a New Language Documents November 1, 2018 December 15, 2018 Extended Parent Conversations: Every Tuesday 2:20 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. September 2018 Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. 7  Parent Roundtable and Parent Learning Series October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019 Various Parent Workshops in curriculum and Common Core Learning Standards September 2018 through June 2019 Fall/Spring Parent Academies September 2018 through June 2019 Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a 8  Annual Individual Education Plan - conference for student with special needs September 2018 through June 2019 English Language Learners parent orientation September 2018 through June 2019 translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. Most documents that require translation can be downloaded from the NYC DOE website. For documents that may require translation, requests are submitted to the Translation and Interpretation Unit on an as needed basis. Translation of document in the Spanish language is managed via staff and/or school website. The school website www.theWaltDisneySchool.org has a translation feature. We may also use a translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We will also use the Language Line form document translation over the phone. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 9  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide P.S. 160 hosts a Welcome Back Family night and Curriculum Week Parent/Teacher conference - Report Cards ELL Parent/Teacher conference and ADHD Awareness January 2019 November 2018 interpretation service(s)? Meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. September 2018 September 25 - 29, 2018 We use over-the-phone interpretation services, such as Language Line. We also use in-person school staff, vendor, community based organizations and/or parent volunteers. Meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. November 2018 March 2019 We use over-the-phone interpretation services, such as Language Line. We also use in-person school staff, vendor, community based organizations and/or parent volunteers. Meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. We use over-the-phone interpretation services, such as Language Line. We also use in-person school staff, vendor, community based organizations and/or parent volunteers. Meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Student Led Conferences May 2019 0 We use over-the-phone interpretation services, such as Language Line. We also use in-person school staff,  Extended Parent Conversations- Every Tuesday, 2:20PM- 3:00PM vendor, community based organizations and/or parent volunteers. Meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. Every Tuesday 2:20 PM - 3:00 PM Various parent workshops in curriculum and Common Core Learning Standards September 2018 to June 2019 We use over-the-phone interpretation services, such as Language Line. We 1 Bi-Monthly Parent Round Table September 2018 to June 2019 Pre-K and Kindergarten orientation September 2018 We use over-the-phone interpretation services, such as Language Line. We also use in-person school staff, vendor, community based organizations and/or parent volunteers. Meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. We use over-the-phone interpretation services, such as Language Line. We also use in-person school staff, vendor, community based organizations and/or parent volunteers. Meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. We use over-the-phone interpretation services, such as Language Line. We also use in-person school staff, vendor, community based organizations and/or parent volunteers. Meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands.  Annual Individual Education Plan conferences for student with special needs also use in-person school staff, vendor, community based organizations and/or parent volunteers. Meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. September 2018 to June 2019 We use over-the-phone interpretation services, such as Language Line. We also use in-person school staff, vendor, community based organizations and/or parent volunteers. Meetings are conducted with qualified interpreters in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. We use over-the-phone interpretation services, such as Language Line. We also use in-person school staff, vendor, community based organizations and/or parent volunteers. English Language Learner parent orientation September 2018 to June 2019 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have Blackboard Connect call system which will provide information in the language needed to families. We also use the Language Line which provide interpretation services in over 200 languages, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Parents can call the school in their language staff will be trained to use the 3 way call system to add Language Line to incoming calls. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Information distributed regularly to staff. We also conduct weekly staff developments. The Language Access Coordinator attends regularly scheduled meetings. The Language Access Coordinator will turn key the information via 2  staff professional development, Disney website, and P.S. 160's weekly newsletter. Quarterly reminders will be entered into the weekly newsletter to ensure that all relevant school personnel is aware of the procedures. All staff members will receive instructions on how to access the Language Line. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) P.S. 160 will provide timely translation and distribution of critical communication including: Registration, standards, conduct/discipline, safety, health, placement in special education or English Language Learners academic program, transfer and discharges. The school will provide interpretation service on site and over the phone by available school personnel during regular business hours. P.S. 160 will provide parents with written notifications of their rights regarding translation and interpretation in the appropriate language and instructions on how to obtain such services. P.S. 160 will post notices in a conspicuous location near the primary entrance, a sign indicating the schools' administrative offices where a copy of written notification about language assistance services can be obtained. P.S. 160 will ensure parents in need of language assistance are not prevented from reaching the schools' administrative offices due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? There are several ways in which our school gathers feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. P.S. 160 has a Parent Coordinator who is available throughout the day to provide any assistance that parents may need. The Parent Coordinator will survey parents on an informal basis in order to provide resources. Parents are provided a parent survey during the month of April in which they are able to express their concerns or satisfaction of services provided. Parents of English Language Learners are provided with a Parent Selection form and Survey during orientation in which they can determine the services that their child will receive. On a monthly basis, parents are invited to a Parent Roundtable. During the Parent Roundtable, parents have an informal conversation with the Parent Coordinator and the administrative team to discuss any issues. 3 
