 11X178 School Name: P.S. 178 - DR. SELMAN WAKSMAN Principal: DEBORAH LEVINE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Dr. Selman Waksman School 11X178 321100010178 K - 5 School Number (DBN): 850 Baychester Avenue Bronx, New York 10475 718 – 904 - 5570 Phone Number: 718 – 904 - 5575 Fax: Deborah Levine dlevine9@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Deborah Levine Carolyn Jandelli Geraldine Williams/Anthony Feliciano Carolyn Jandelli Monique Scott N/A N/A SASF- Shay Coke District Information Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: CristineVaughan Superintendent: 2750 Throop Avenue Bronx, New York 10469 cvaugha2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2620 Phone Number: 718-519-2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, New York 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Deborah Levine Carolyn Jandelli, Chairperson Anthony Feliciano N/A Monique Scott, Presenter/Observer N/A N/A Shay Coke Yvette Vasquez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative/SASF Observer/Presenter/ Parent Coordinator Member/   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cynthia Rodriguez JaichelleBrown Jennifer Streppone QuianaSmoak Stephanie Parker Diana Gani Geraldine Williams Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/PA Co-President Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS 178’s Mission Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview Staff, families, and students will work hard by communicating, caring, and cooperating to create a community of life-long learners who are college and career ready. PS 178X’s vision is that staff and parents will collaborate to create a nurturing, well-rounded, educational experience for our students. Our efforts will result in the acquisition of knowledge, and the development of creativity, critical   thinking, and social and communication skills which are the tools for college and career readiness. All adults will be responsible and accountable for ensuring that the instructional program meets the standards of academic excellence for all students. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 178X is an elementary school located in the Northeast Education Park in the Co-Op City section of the Bronx. We service students in grades K through 5, in general and special education classes. Our building also houses PS 176X, a District 75 school educating students with autism. Each year, PS 178 and PS 176 collaborate on an inclusion program in which students from PS 176 are mainstreamed and educated in our PS 178 classes. Extensions to our academic program include Academic Academy, Saturday Academy, school clubs, annual Spelling Bees for grades 2-3 and grades 4-5, Grade K-5 Science Fair, and Word of the Day. We also celebrate Read Across America Day and Poem in Your Pocket Day. All instruction is enhanced through the use of SMARTboards, to which all students have access. PS 178 boasts a computer lab outfitted with brand new desktops. In addition, each classroom is equipped with student laptops to support and engage students in instruction. Commitment to the arts is an integral part of our program. We offer dance and a multi-media visual arts program. Arts teachers collaborate with classroom teachers to plan and produce thematic grade-wide assembly programs and dance festivals. Our after school program in the arts includes dance, visual arts, chess, and technology. Social skills are developed and enhanced via our Intervention Program and Citizen of the Month celebrations. In addition, selected 4th and 5th graders participate in Project Boost. We are also working with and growing our relationship with Socialsklz, whereby offering our students an opportunity to hone their social etiquette skills. PS 178 has an extensive Community Service Plan. Highlighted is our participation in annual Clothing and Toy Drives and our partnership with the Jewish Association Serving the Aging (JASA). The Sports and Arts Foundation (SASF) continues to provide a free after-school program to as many as 125 of our students. All students receive homework help and participate in recreational activities on a daily basis. SASF also offers a summer program. As a means of organizing for effort and developing capacity, leadership teams have been established. These teams tap the expertise of staff members to focus on program assessment and address areas of need. These teams include: School Leadership, Safety, Building Response, Building Council, Curriculum, Response to Intervention (RtI), Professional Development Committee, Measures of Student Learning (MOSL), and Teacher Leadership Program sponsored by the UFT (TLP). Maintaining our status as a School in Good Standing is an expectation that administrators, staff, and parents have. Valuing teacher collaboration as a vehicle for increasing student achievement and learning opportunities for all pupils, administrators schedule time for and encourage cooperative planning and professional learning activities. Teachers 0  on each grade share a minimum of 3 common preparation periods per week. In addition, we organize professional learning opportunities each Monday afternoon (e.g. inquiry, looking at student work, norming rubrics, sharing best practices). Horizontal and vertical professional development workshops are organized. Literacy and math coaches, the special unit coordinator, grade leaders, and administrators provide in-house professional development for the staff and mentoring for individuals. Our partnerships with Center for Educational Innovation – Public Education Association (CEI-PEA), United Federation of Teachers Teacher Center (UFTTC), Center for Integrated Teacher Education (CITE), and Teacher Leadership Program (TLP) have complemented said work and have supported our school in meeting our goals of increasing teacher effectiveness and improving student achievement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our building houses PS 176X, a District 75 school educating students with autism. Each year, PS 178 and PS 176 collaborate on an inclusion program in which students from PS 176 are mainstreamed and educated in our PS 178 classes. This collaboration provides the academic and social environment prescribed in their IEPs. These students are supported by PS 176 paraprofessionals. PS 178X services students in temporary housing. Within the school setting, these students are supported academically and socially with the same services afforded to all other students (e.g AIS, counseling, after school programs, class trips, etc.) A DoE funded position serves as a liaison between the local shelter and the school. Our students with IEPs are educated in their respective least restrictive environments in accordance with their specific IEPs. This includes self-contained, ICT, SETTS, and related services. The school's practice of flexible programming ensures that students are educated along side their general education peers when appropriate. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As per the Framework for Great Schools, PS 178 takes pride in maintaining practices in the areas of Strong Family and Community Ties as well as Collaborative Teachers. In maintaining strong family and community ties, the parent coordinator endeavors to increase parental involvement and to address concerns. She organizes workshops and oversees the publication of a monthly parent newsletter. Liaisons from CITE have also conducted parent workshops focused on topics such as at home help, CCLS, and the transition to middle school. Important information is not only back-packed home, but shared via School Messenger – our telephone relay system. Staff offers additional parent engagement time each Tuesday afternoon in accordance with the UFT contract. Teachers are also available during preparation periods to engage in parent communication. Teachers collaborate to provide rigorous instruction for all students including our special populations (Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, and Students in Temporary Housing). Teachers in general and special education programs, including service providers, share best practices in adapting and differentiating curricula to best meet the needs of their respective populations. PS 178 uses said collaboration as the vehicle to provide rigorous instruction within a supportive environment as we educate the "whole child". Our key areas of focus as outlined in our goals include continuing to provide rigorous instruction aligned with the Common Core Learning Standards, meeting the needs of all of our students, raising student achievement, and providing teachers with actionable feedback and support to increase effectiveness. 1  2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X178 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 435 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 67 66 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 69.0% % Reduced Lunch 4.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 32.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 88% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 46 47 93.9% 11.5% 23.0% 59.1% 3.2% 1.4% 2 0% 6.2 21.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the NYS ELA assessment data indicated for the 2017-2018 school year:: - In 2017, 29.0% of our students in grades 3-5 scored at Levels 3 and 4 - In 2018, 30.0% of our students in grades 3-5 scored at Levels 3 and 4, indicating an increase of 1.0% According to the 2016-2017 Quality Review ratings: - We earned a rating of "Proficient" in Indicator 2.2 - "Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessments and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels." Our school's strengths are as follows: Instruction is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS).  Teachers provide rigorous and coherent curricula that is accessible to all learners.   Teachers reference and reflect upon the Danielson Framework for Teaching to improve pedagogical skills.  Assessments are aligned to curricula. Teachers use ongoing assessment and grading practices to provide students with timely feedback.  Teacher teams use protocols as they examine student work to inform and adjust instruction.  Best practices are shared as teachers collaborate on teams to improve students learning. Our school's needs are as follows:  Data indicates a need to increase the percentage of students scoring Levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA assessment.  Based on student performance, we need to include more explicit instruction in ELA. 4   We will continue to offer workshops to keep families informed of at-home strategies that reinforce the school's instructional focus as well as increase the level of their children's achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades 3-5 will demonstrate progress towards achieving state standards as measured by a 4% increase in students scoring at Levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA assessment. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teachers will participate in professional development targeting best practices in ELA, as well as make modifications to the ReadyGen curriculum. teachers, students 2. Teachers will support students within the classroom by using differentiated scaffolded instruction. teachers, students a. DRA levels are monitored 6 times per year (September, October, November, January, March, and June). b. Student report cards and IEP goals are monitored three times per year (beginning, middle, and end). c. Classroom student performance assessment is ongoing and instructional grouping is daily and flexible. d. Learning styles and management needs as outlined in student IEPs will be reviewed to provide appropriate instruction for students with disabilities. 3. AIS will be provided for the level 1 and 2 students in grades 4 and 5. At-risk students in grades 1, 2, and 3 will also be serviced. Targeted population will include students with disabilities and English language learners. Support programs will include SPIRE and Orton Gillingham. teachers, coaches, Pearson trainers, CITE, Teachers College Writing Program trainers, Teq, administrators teachers, coaches, administrators ongoing - September 2018 through June 2019 Daily - September 2018 through June 2019 . AIS teachers, RtI team, administrators ongoing, September 2018 through June 2019 - AIS groups are seen 1 or 2 times per week Level 1 and 2 students in grades 4 and 5, at-risk students in grades 1, 2, and 3 6 4. Sports and Arts after-school program (SASF) will offer an ELA/Technology Support Club. SASF students 5. Literacy and math coaches, in conjunction with the parent coordinator will offer parent workshops to provide at home strategies to support the acquisition of standards based instruction. Parents April 2019-June 2019 (each grade once per week) Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 SASF director, SASF teachers Coaches, parent coordinator, administrators 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will schedule two (2) parent workshops (Fall 2018 and Spring 2019). Coaches, in conjunction with the parent coordinator, will offer parent workshops focused on CCLS and at home strategies to support the acquisition of standards based instruction. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. ThinkCentral, Pearson curriculum, Teq training, Teachers College Writing Program, off-site professional development, Monday afternoon professional development, UFTTC 2. 100 minute literacy block, whole group instruction, small group instruction, ReadyGen leveled libraries, myON Readers, News-O-matic, test sophistication books 3. ReadyGen guided reading leveled libraries, Sundance Non-fiction Comprehension Kit, scheduled AIS groups, SPIRE Program, Orton Gillingham methodology 4. SASF faculty 5. Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), schedule of parent workshops 6. Teacher and supervisor per session, per diem funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 7  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, analysis of mid-year ELA assessments will indicate a 2% increase in students scoring Levels 3 and 4. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  NYS ELA Assessment data  Mid-year ELA assessments (Ready Gen, DRA) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the NYS ELA assessment data as indicated for the 2017-2018 school year: - In 2017, 29.0% of our students in grades 3-5 scored at Levels 3 and 4 - In 2018, 30.0% of our students in grades 3-5 scored at Levels 3 and 4, indicating an increase of 1.0% According to our RtI data: - During the 2017-2018 school year, 74% of our RtI students increased their DRA score by at least 2 levels. According to the 2016-2017 Quality Review ratings: - We earned a rating of "Proficient" in Indicator 2.2 - "Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessments and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels." Our school's strengths are as follows:  Teacher teams meet regularly to plan effective lessons and examine student work.  Teachers collaborate to adapt curricula to meet the needs of diverse learners.  All staff provide a supportive environment while educating the "whole" child.  Students have the opportunity to be celebrated as Citizen of the Month at a breakfast with other citizens and their parents. School-wide "Links of Excellence" promote positive conduct via a reward system.   The school environment is conducive to learning.  RtI meetings are held regularly in order to address student needs. Case managers are assigned for follow-up.  Resources are allocated appropriately to allow for multiple AIS positions, as well as a dedicated Intervention Teacher. Our school's needs are as follows: 9  Data indicates a need to increase the percentage of students scoring Levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA assessment.  We will continue to offer workshops to keep families informed of at-home strategies that reinforce the school's instructional focus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the reading levels of students examined by the Response to Intervention (RtI) Team will increase by at least two DRA levels. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Teachers will participate in professional development that will address a common language and provide a forum for sharing of best practices during horizontal and vertical share-out at teacher team meetings. PD topics will include: teachers - classroom intervention strategies; - models of differentiated instruction; - methods of positive reinforcement; - de-escalation strategies. 2. The RtI Team will meet at least one time per month to examine individual cases using multiple data sources (anecdotal reports, frequency charts, exam histories, samples of student work) provided by the classroom teacher. Student data will be analyzed to develop intervention strategies and toolkits at each level. at-risk students Tier I: Classroom intervention strategies (e.g. seat change, small group, differentiated tasks), class/school wide positive behavior incentive programs (e.g. links of excellence, class lotteries) which lead to class/individual privileges Tier II: Classroom teacher monitored individual behavior reports, conflict resolution, peer tutoring, at-risk group counseling, guidance conference, peer mediation, at-risk SETSS, parent outreach, Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Tier III: Intervention teacher monitored individual academic and behavior reports, at-risk individual counseling, parent outreach, push-in/pull-out support, Life Space Crisis Intervention (LSCI), Therapeutic Crisis Intervention (TCI) 3. The team will monitor the progress, evaluate effectiveness, and inform next steps. at-risk students ongoing, throughout the year - (at least 3 common preps per week and the 80 minute Monday professional learning time) at least one time per month – September 2018 through June 2019 RtI team, administrators, teachers, coaches RtI team, administrators, teachers, School Assessment Team (SAT), at-risk SETSS, at-risk counseling, AIS, Intervention teacher ongoing –September 2018 RtI team, administrators, teachers, coaches 1  through June 2019 4 to 6 week cycles of intervention 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. - Administration organizes for effort and maintains a teaching position dedicated to intervention. This teacher works with students and families on social-emotional issues. As chairperson of the RtI Team, she assigns case managers to make outreach to parents to offer suggestions and serve as liaisons to the team. - The Guidance Counselor, SETTS teacher, related service providers, and School Assessment Team (psychologist, social worker, and family worker) support both mandated and at-risk students and make outreach to parents as necessary. When warranted, referrals to outside agencies are made. - The above mentioned staff members are all introduced at Kindergarten Orientation in June and at the first Parent/Teacher Meeting in September. Pertinent staff are also present at parent meetings related to IEPs, academic, and/or social-emotional need. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. LSCI methods, TCI strategies, teacher team meetings (at least 3 common preps per week and the 80 minute Monday professional learning time) 2. LSCI methods, TCI strategies, differentiated tasks, AIS resources (e.g. Sundance Non-fiction Comprehension Kit) 3. RtI team meetings, teacher team meetings(at least 3 common preps per week and the 80 minute Monday professional learning time) 4. Teacher and supervisor per session, per diem funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 2  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, analysis of DRA will indicate an increase of at least one reading level for those students examined by the RtI Team. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  DRA data sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2016-2017 NYC School Quality Survey: - 92% of teachers at this school work together to design instructional programs. (City-93%) - 82% of teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. (City-88%) According to the 2016-2017 Quality Review ratings: - We earned a "Well Developed" rating in Indicator 4.2 - "Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning." - We earned "Proficient" ratings in Indicators 1.4 and 3.4 - "Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults." and "Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provides supports to achieve those expectations." According to the NYS ELA assessment data: - In 2017, 29.0% of our students in grades 3-5 scored at Levels 3 and 4 - In 2018, 30.0% of our students in grades 3-5 scored at Levels 3 and 4, indicating an increase of 1.0% According to the NYS MATH assessment data: - In 2017, 32.0% of our students in grades 3-5 scored at Levels 3 and 4 - In 2018, 22.0% of our students in grades 3-5 scored at Levels 3 and 4 4  Our school's strengths are as follows:  Teacher teams meet at least 3 to 4 times per week to plan effective lessons and examine student work.  Teachers collaborate to adapt curricula to meet the needs of diverse learners.  All staff provide a supportive environment while educating the "whole" child.  Students have the opportunity to be celebrated as Citizen of the Month at a breakfast with other citizens and their parents. School-wide "Links of Excellence" promote positive conduct via a reward system.   The school environment is conducive to learning.  RtI meetings are held regularly in order to address student needs. Case managers are assigned for follow-up.  Resources are allocated appropriately to allow for multiple AIS positions, as well as a dedicated Intervention Teacher. Our school's needs are as follows:  Data indicates a need to increase the percentage of students scoring Levels 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA and MATH assessments.  We will continue to offer workshops to keep families informed of at-home strategies that reinforce the school's instructional focus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have participated in differentiated professional development aligned with student needs as measured by a 4% increase in students scoring at Levels 3 and 4 on the NYS Math Assessment. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  1a. The Professional Development Team will draft a PD Plan that will systematically address and support our instructional focus and increase the achievement of all student sub-groups. 1b. Teachers will complete a two-fold survey - to identify areas in which they want to grow their practice in accordance with the Danielson Rubric and to identify areas of self-assessed strength they can turn-key to colleagues. 2. Based on trends gleaned from observations, administrators will identify relative strengths and weaknesses regarding teacher practice. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? PD Team August 2018-September 2018, and ongoing September 2018 administrators, PD Team teachers administrators, coaches administrators September administrators 3. Administrators will arrange intervisitations so that teachers with identified strengths can share best practices with colleagues. teachers 4. The PD Team will incorporate survey results into the PD plan teachers 2018-October 2018 ongoing, October 2018 - June 2019 ongoing - Monday PD, common prep periods, PD days ongoing - Monday PD, common administrators, coaches administrators, PD Team 6  5. PD will include strategies for keeping parents informed as well as maintaining positive relationships. prep periods, PD days teachers administrators, PD Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. - Administration has mandated that each teacher keep a parent outreach log. All communication with the families of students is documented in the log. In addition to preparation periods, all teachers are afforded time each Tuesday afternoon (2:40 - 3:15) to make necessary contact with parents (in person or via phone). - Many teachers use the REMIND app and the school continues to use School Messenger, a telephone relay system to keep families informed of important deadlines and/or events. - Our Parent Coordinator, in conjunction with the principal, creates and distributes a Monthly Newsletter to all families. Important messages and upcoming events are disseminated as are curriculum updates from each grade. - Some teachers use the DOJO app to provide parents with immediate positive feedback regarding their child's conduct and work ethic. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. PD Team meetings in August to draft a PD Plan to support our instructional focus. Per session funding will be allocated. 2. Advance teacher observation reports will be reviewed by administrators. 3. Intervisitation schedules will be arranged. 4. Administrators and coaches will create and review the two-fold survey. The PD calendar will be established. 5. Teacher and supervisor per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 7  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, analysis of mid-year assessments will indicate a 2% increase in students scoring at Levels 3 and 4. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Professional Development (PD) Plan  Advance observation data  Mid-year assessment (Go Math!) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. - Education Law 3012-c requires that classroom teachers who have been assigned primary responsibility for a student’s learning in a subject/course with aligned performance measures be evaluated according to the Advance System. - Review of overall Advance observation data indicates a need to improve teacher effectiveness. As per the overall ratings as indicated in the system, 2.7% of teachers were Highly Effective, 92% were Effective, 2.7% were Developing, and 2.7% were Ineffective. Our school's strengths are as follows:  Administration meets all deadlines related to Measures of Teacher Practice.  During common planning time, teachers share best practices and look at student work to inform instruction.  Teachers receive timely, actionable feedback with specific recommendations to impact student learning.  Literacy and Math coaches, Special Unit Coordinator, and Intervention teacher provide in-house professional development and support.  Resources are allocated to provide professional development opportunities from support organizations (e.g. CITE, CEI-PEA). Our school's needs are as follows:  We will continue to analyze current Advance observation data to provide targeted professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Advance Observation Dashboard will reflect a 2% increase of teachers scoring in the Effective range of Domain 3. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  1. Administrators will participate in job embedded support. administrators ongoing - 2. Teachers will participate in professional development, including inter-visitations, to secure a lens of collaborative common language and clear expectations for effective teaching practices. Teachers of ESL and special education as well as related service providers will support student progress by identifying necessary intervention strategies. teachers 3. Administrators will hold initial planning conferences, conduct observations, and feedback conferences as per option selections. Feedback will include strategies and resources to improve teacher practice. administrators, teachers, 4. Teachers will engage in collegial conversations during team meetings as they engage in Looking at Student Work (LASW) teachers, students September 2018 through June 2019 ongoing - September 2018 through June 2019 (at least 3 common preps per week and the 80 minute Monday professional learning time) initial planning conferences held by the end of September 2018, observations and feedback conferences between the beginning of October 2018 and the end of March 2019 ongoing - September 2018 through talent coaches, administrators teachers, coaches, UFT Teacher Center, administrators administrators, teachers teachers, coaches, administrators 0 Protocols and examine their own practice as it relates to student achievement. June 2019 during post observation feedback conversations and teacher team meetings (at least 3 common preps per week and the 80 minute Monday professional learning time) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. - The principal will meet with the Parent Association President quarterly. Focus of discussion will include workshop topics, strategies to increase parent attendance at meeting and workshops, and disclosure of financial reports. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1 . Advance FAQs, Advance rubrics, schedule of teacher observations with talent coach 2. On-line learning opportunities, teacher team meetings (at least 3 common preps per week and the 80 minute Monday professional learning time) 3. Schedule of initial planning conferences, intake sheet detailing initial planning conference “minutes”, Advance reports detailing progress towards completion of required observations, signed observation reports 4. Teacher team meeting minutes, team binder of inquiry work (LASW), a minimum of 3 scheduled common planning periods per week, the 80 minute Monday professional learning time, online learning opportunities 5. Teacher and supervisor per session, per diem funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 1  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, analysis of Advance data will indicate improvement by one level in at least one component by at least 50% of teachers evaluated. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Advance teacher observation data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the 2016-2017 NYC School Quality Survey: - 94% of parents say that they are satisfied with the education their child received. (City-95%) - 89% of parents feel that the Principal works to crate a sense of community in the school. (City-94%) - 88% of parents say that the school staff works hard to build trusting relationships with them. (City-94%) - 93% of parents responded that they were somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event. According to the 2016-2017 Quality Review ratings: - We earned ratings of "Proficient" in Indicators 1.4 and 3.4 - "Maintain a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students and adults." and "Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provides supports to achieve those expectations." According to our parent workshop data: - At the May 2017 Parent Engagement Event, 6% of parents were in attendance. - An average of 4% of parents attended the monthly PA meetings during the 2017-2018 school year. - An average of 2% of parents participated in the parent workshops conducted during the 2017-2018 school year. Our school's strengths are as follows: 3  Teachers maintain open lines of communication with families during Tuesday afternoon parent engagement activities. All teachers maintain a log of said communication.  Budgetary allowances are made for CITE to provide parent workshops.  A menu of workshop topics are provided to gauge interest. Our school's needs are as follows:  Data indicates a need to increase the number of parents in attendance at workshops offered at the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent attendance at workshops will increase by at least 5% as measured by the attendance sheets. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? parents September 2018 Administrators, coaches, and parent coordinator parents parents monthly 2018 - 2019 Administrators, coaches, and parent coordinator 2 times per year Fall 2018 Spring 2019 Administrators, coaches, parent coordinator, and teachers 2 times per year Fall 2018 Spring 2019 Administrators, coaches, parent coordinator, and teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Administrators, coaches, and parent coordinator will create a survey for parents to indicate preferred workshop topics and time of day. Suggested topics will include CCLS, alternative problem solving strategies, real life reading and writing activities, vocabulary development, study habits, time management, and listening skills. 2. Administrators, coaches, and parent coordinator will establish a calendar of workshops. Said calendar will be communicated with parents via fliers, School Messenger, and monthly newsletters. 3a. Student talent will be highlighted at parent workshops (e.g. Science Fair projects, Unit projects, dance, art work, poetry reading) 3b. Parents will be invited to attend curriculum based workshops with their children where they will engage in standards based activities together (e.g. math games, content related jeopardy , book talks, and science explorations). parents 4. The school will host a Career Night for both parents and students. Parents will gain information and students will learn about different career options (e.g. health and well- being, financial planning, law enforcement, creative arts, education). parents 1 time per year Spring 2019 Administrators, parent coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. - Sports and Arts (SASF) - Jewish Association Serving the Aged (JASA) - Center for Integrated Teacher Education (CITE) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Parent Survey 2. School Messenger 3. Monthly Parent Newsletters 4. Calendar of Events 5. Teacher and supervisor per session 6. Instructional resources (e.g. MyOn Reading Program, New-O-matic, Go Math! games, Teachers College Writing activities, Ready Gen reading activities) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, parent participation at workshops will increase by at least 3% as evidenced by attendance sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  parent workshop sign-in sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Include: ● in-class assessments (e.g. running records, performance based assessments, benchmarks, conferences) ● RtI referral ● NYS ELA Assessment Include: ● in-class assessments (e.g. performance based assessments, benchmarks, conferences) ● RtI referral ● NYS Math Assessment Include: ● in-class assessments (e.g. unit tests, performance based Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group * During the school day * After-school Academic Club * Saturday Academy Small group ● During the school day ● After-school Academic Club *Saturday Academy Small group During the school day ● At-risk SETSS Multiple entry points of instruction, higher order thinking, critical analysis of text, close reading, teacher modeling, guided and independent reading ● At-risk SETSS Multiple entry points of instruction, higher order thinking, critical analysis of text, close reading, teacher modeling, guided and independent reading  Multiple entry points of instruction, higher order thinking, critical 7  assessments, conferences) ● RtI referral ● Grade 4 NYS Science Assessment Social Studies Include: ● in-class assessments (e.g. unit tests, projects, conferences) ● RtI referral Include: ● parent concerns (e.g. family issues, self-esteem) ● teacher concerns (e.g. self-esteem, behaviors that impede academic progress) At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) analysis of text, close reading, teacher modeling, guided and independent reading  Multiple entry points of instruction, higher order thinking, critical analysis of text, close reading, teacher modeling, guided and independent reading Counseling is provided by the guidance counselor, school psychologist, and/or social worker on as needed basis as recommended by the RtI Team. Small group During the school day ● 1:1 During the school day ● Small group 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 15 Each year, Title I money is budgeted for the STH population. This money is used for emergency supplies as well as educational services such as: - general school supplies such as notebooks, paper, glue sticks, pencils, crayons, book bags etc. - school uniforms - attendance on class trips - school pictures - graduation cap and gown packages - guidance counseling - AIS providers - Social Workers - Parent workshops Title I money is allocated to assist the STH population in meeting the State's challenging academic content and achievement standards as well as as assisting them when they have urgent needs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  Candidates are interviewed by a hiring committee.  Interview questions reflect an understanding of best practices (CCLS, differentiation, assessment strategies, student engagement, meeting the needs of diverse learners, management, and family communication).  The payroll secretary works closely with the HR point person to ensure that teachers meet all the assessment deadlines and have all the necessary documentation.  A mentor is assigned to each first year teacher.  The UFT Teacher Center provides differentiated professional development as well as additional teacher resources for all teachers.  The Literacy and Math Coaches provide demonstration lessons, differentiated support, and facilitate during inter-visitations.  The Special Education Liaison provides support to the special education teachers in areas such as curriculum, assessment, management, and goal writing.  Administration provides common planning time, internal and external professional learning opportunities, and timely feedback regarding teacher practice in relation to student achievement. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Administration schedules at least 3 common preparation periods per week for unit planning. In addition, the Monday afternoon 80 minute sessions are utilized for professional learning. 1   Teachers and administrators are engaged in internal and external professional learning regarding: - CCLS aligned instruction, - Danielson Framework, Advance, - best practices, - modifications for Students with Disabilities (SWD) /English Language Learners (ELL), - paraprofessional support, - Looking at Student Work (LASW) and monitoring progress to modify practice and meet the needs of all students. ● Teachers meet with administrators and receive feedback on teaching practices and student achievement. ● Coaches and mentors meet with teachers and provide differentiated support/resources. ● Administrators collaborate with BFSC point people on aspects including supervisory support, data, Measures of Teacher Practice (MOTP), Measures of Student Learning (MOSL), and budget. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.).  Each year, in June, we host a Kindergarten Orientation Workshop. During this time, we welcome the parents of incoming Kindergarten students, introduce key staff members, and review aspects of our school including: - curriculum, 2  - information about CCLS, - support systems, - parent engagement activities, - school uniform policy, - school celebrations and activities.  The SAT conducts Turning 5 evaluations when warranted. Student needs are ascertained through the evaluation and from input from parents and pre-school. Appropriate services are provided. Each September, all key staff members are available to help parents and students transition into Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teacher teams review/revise grade level mid-year and end of year assessments. ● Teacher teams design/use rubrics that effectively assess student performance and provide essential feedback. ● Professional learning time is scheduled so that teacher teams engage in norming/scoring/analyzing protocols for MOSL assessments, unit tests, performance based assessments, and running records. ● Teacher teams look at student work via a protocol in order to identify trends, refine teacher practice, and increase student achievement. ● Administrators and coaches meet with teacher teams to ascertain teacher comfort level/knowledge regarding assessment strategies and provide differentiated support/feedback. Performance based assessments have been reflected in the pacing calendars. Teachers demonstrate data collection in a data binder. Said data is analyzed and student needs are met via small group, differentiated instruction, AIS, or when warranted a referral to the RtI Team. Student work samples are compiled in portfolios. Professional development/support is provided on an ongoing basis regarding effective assessment practices. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 3  Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 321,059.00 Title II, Part A Federal 49,779.00 Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 2,877,958.00 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A -Part 3 and 4 Section 5B-Part 3 and 4 Section 5C-Part 3 and 4 Section 5D- Part 3 and 4 Section5E-Part 3 and 4 Section 6 Section 5A -Part 3 and 4 Section 5B-Part 3 and 4 Section 5C-Part 3 and 4 Section 5D- Part 3 and 4 Section5E-Part 3 and 4 Section 6 Section 5A -Part 3 and 4 Section 5B-Part 3 and 4 Section 5C-Part 3 and 4 Section 5D- Part 3 and 4 4  Section5E-Part 3 and 4 Section 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 5   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 178X in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 178X will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 178X , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 9  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards that promotes college and career readiness; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 0  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to participate in school-wide events; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g. Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 1  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name DR.SELMAN WAKSMAN Borough Bronx School Number 178 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Deborah Levine Coach Allison Hayden, Literacy ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elisa Marcus Teacher/Subject Area Carolyn Jandelli/ELA Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Samantha Dietzel Superintendent Meisha Ross-Porter Assistant Principal Jennifer Streppone Coach Jean Staudt, Math School Counselor Debra Penate Parent Geraldine Williams Parent Coordinator Yvette Vasquez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 480 4 Total number of ELLs 20 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.17%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) NA NA NA K 1 2 3 Lang. NA 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? A variety of assessments are utilized to guide instructional planning. After looking at the data, we found that many of our students plateaued at the expanding level and regressed a level. Therefore, we are going to do more interim assessments to monitor progress throughout the year. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? As a result, the ENL and content teachers will review the interim assessments and modify the instruction in order to address the gaps. 5  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The literacy team, the ENL teacher, and the student support team will meet regularly to analyze these results and modify lesson plans, if necessary. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The school's Response to Intervention Team (RTI) meets monthly to plan interventions for students whose assessment results indicate a need. Interventions include in class small group instruction, Academic Intervention Services in both pull-out and push-in models for all students, and at risk SETSS, 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Analysis of data is used to identify areas of need for ELL students referred to RTI. The ELL provider confers with classroom teacher and provides scaffolds such as, differentiated instruction, visual aids and realia to enhance student learning. The ELL teacher uses multiple entry points to provide appropriate supports for all students. Additionally, a team composed of the RtI provider, ENL teacher, and AIS teacher will meet and discuss the following criteria in order to determine if more support is needed: - Number of years the student received instruction in a bilingual or ENL language - English and the home language literacy levels - Content area and socio-emotional support needs of SIFE students - English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELL students -NYSESLAT results -Bilingual education, ENL, and content area teacher recommendation 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After carefully looking at the data from the assessments listed above and the RLAT, the data show that several of our students are either plateauing or regressing. Therefore, our ELL programs will include more support for advanced literacy and home language support. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data specialist provides teachers with assessment and item analysis results from NYC and NYS assessments. Classroom teachers and ESL teacher maintain datafolios which include student work and relevant needs assessment information. Common planning periods are established by administration to promote sharing of student performance among pertinent staff. EDAT is not available at the present time. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 6  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. As per CR Part 154 regulations, stand-alone English as a new language is a teaching model in which students receive English language instruction needed for success in content area subjects. However, a student cannot receive stand-alone ENL instead of core content area instruction. Integrated ENL is a teaching model in which students receive core content area and ENL instruction from a dually certified teacher or two certified teachers. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ESL teacher administers NYSITELL to eligible students. Students are then programmed to receive the mandated minutes of service based on the results. These results are then given to the Data Specialist who then enters them into STARS. The ESL teacher accesses the STARS and E-Data monthly report to ensure that students receive the mandated units and minutes of service in each modality. All students receive their mandated ESL/ENL service units in full accordance with the CR Part 154 which is as follows: 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas are addressed in the ENL classroom using activities encouraging language acquisition. All instruction is delivered in English. Time is spent on specific math and science concepts, as well as general English language development. During ENL class, science and social studies themes are addressed and aligned with CCLS and the six shifts. Students learn vocabulary and language structures that scaffold on what they are doing in their mainstream classrooms. This facilitates student access to classroom learning. Programs such as the Globe science program as well as the SEED programs are implemented in the ENL classroom using the multiple-intelligence strategies and best practices. ESL teacher conducts small group lessons that are aligned with grade curriculum. Instruction is scaffolded using visual aids and realia to enhance student learning. In addition, ENL strategies such as modeling, bridging, and schema building are utilized. ENL lessons focus on developing language skills aligned with the standards to help the ENL population achieve the same high standards as their peers. Differentiated instruction is used to help meet student needs. Texts are adapted, reproduced and scaffolded appropriately for the ENL students. Organizers, sentence starters, vocabulary front loading, TRP (Total Physical Response), Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol ( SIOP), and backward design techniques are used to help students in schema building. ESL teacher follows the curriculum mapping of ReadyGen and plans lessons aligned with the classroom teachers’ plans. The SMARTboard supports all ENL instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Materials in a student's native language are provided if available. Materials in a student's native language are provided if available. When taking the NYS math and science standardized tests, students are offered a copy of the test in their native language. This practice has been followed during the school year. Additionally, the Spanish Lab-R is used as a tool to measure the proficiency level of Spanish speaking students. 7  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for content, process, product, readiness, interests and learning profile for each of the following subgroups. a. SIFE Instruction is conducted in small groups to provide individualized support. The ENL teacher assesses each student, creates goals, and develops action plans . The student receives differentiated instruction using the four modalities in reading, writing, listening and speaking. Articulation between the ESL teacher and the classroom teacher ensures continuity of instruction. A non-English speaking SIFE student is placed with a teacher who speaks the same native language when available. The ENL room is equipped with books on tapes, posters, picture cards, realia and illustrations. b. Newcomer ELLs who have been in the U.S. for less than three years are monitored by their classroom teachers and the ENL teacher to assess specific language and cultural understanding and/or barriers. The teachers regularly discuss their findings in order to develop tools to meet individual needs. Articulation between the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher fosters continuity of instruction. Needs are addressed through a variety of language learning methods. Lessons about American customs and cultural norms help students become comfortable with new traditions. Students are often the experts, teaching others about their specific culture and traditions. Non-English speaking student are placed with a teacher who is fluent in the student’s native language when available. In addition, materials in the child’s language are provided. In the case of special education ELLs whose IEP mandates a bilingual program, but whose parent requests that the student remain in the school, a paraprofessional who speaks the native language is assigned. c. Developing For students whose English language skills are emerging, assessments, both formal and informal, are administered to identify specific areas of need. These needs are addressed through a variety of ENL language learning methods and strategies. Differentiation is provided through the use of Sheltered Instruction (SIOP), Total Physical Response (TRP), graphic organizers, vocabulary development, re-wording of instructions, re-writing the text, usage of sentence starters and frames, just right books, audio-visual aids, and role-playing and dramatization. d.. Long term ELLs NYSESLAT scores and other available data of such students are analyzed to determine in which modality(ies) additional support is needed. Strategies for the ENL class and the mainstream classroom are put into place. These students are discussed at the school's Response to Intervention team meetings to determine if additional interventions are warranted. d. Former ELLs ENL instruction is provided to support students for an additional two years after they exit ENL status. The support is in the form of a 90 minute block per week of integrated ENL instruction. Students receive testing accommodations during these two years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Classroom teachers provide strong Tier 1 high quality instruction utilizing small group instruction with modified and adapted texts. ENL teacher uses Sheltered Instruction (SIOP), TRP strategies, graphic organizers, vocabulary development, re-wording 8  of instructions, usage of sentence starters, just right books, audio visual aides, pictures, role playing and dramatization, picture cards, games and activities that reinforce academic skills. These strategies are designed to help students meet their IEP goals. The focus of all lessons is to increase the acquisition and the development of the English language in the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. Technology such as laptops and SMARTboards are used to support ELLs in their home classrooms. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL students with disabilities have the same access to the curriculum as their general education peers. They receive instruction according to the CCLS utilizing the Home Language Arts Progressions to address their IEP goals using grade appropriate materials. These materials are modified to meet the needs of the students. Flexible programming allows for students to receive instruction in the least restrictive environment. School wide programming provides uniform block periods across each grade so that students can receive instruction in the most appropriate setting. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All targeted intervention programs for ELLS in ELA, Math and other core content areas are offered in English only for all ELL subgroups. The Fundations Program provides targeted instruction in phonics. The SETSS provider uses the SPIRE program to identified second and third graders. Thirty fourth and fifth students, some of which are ELLS are receiving Math instruction in Go Math Academy, which supplements the Go Math curriculum. AIS provider conducts guided reading instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The National Geographic Program which includes lessons and materials, some of which are on line, will promote language acquisition in science and social studies. Also, if funds are available educational trips will be planned for ELLs and their parents. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. These programs include: These activities focus on advanced literacy skills and language growth. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs are supported with all the instructional materials as their English dominant counterparts. These materials include Ready Gen and Go Math. In addition, leveled texts (fiction and non-fiction) are used to allow students with varied reading levels access to information. All classrooms including the ENL room are outfitted with SMARTboards as well as new laptops. Students use various sites including Brain Pop and Brain Pop Jr. MyOn Readers are also used to support literacy instruction. All instruction is delivered in English. However, materials such as math, science, and social studies text books are available in Spanish as additional supports. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program, all languages are honored and supported. For example, when available, a non-English speaking student is placed with a teacher who is fluent in the student’s native language and is paired with a classmate who speaks the same language. In addition, when possible, materials including math, science, and social studies textbooks are provided in the child's native language. In the case of special education ELLs whose IEP mandates a bilingual program, and whose parent requests 9  that the student attends this school, a paraprofessional who speaks the child's native language is assigned. Ready Gen, our literacy program, helps us to incorporate cognates in teaching all students, particularly supporting our ELLs. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students are grouped as much as possible with like age/grade levels. ELLs receive instruction in pull-out and integrated push-in models. Based on ENL regulation of CR Part 154 there are no more than two contiguous grades in the standalone model unless the student is receiving special education services. The groupings for September will be K-1, 2-3, and 4-5. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does share a building with a D75 program. Approximately 20 students from the D75 school are included full time in our K-5 classrooms. Each of these classrooms is assigned a D75 paraprofessional, who supports the inclusion students as well as identified general education students, some of whom are ELLs. In some cases, this paraprofessional is fluent in the ELL's native language and is able to translate and thus support learning. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the month of June, the school hosts a Kindergarten Orientation Day facilitated by the principal, assistant principal, guidance counselor, ELA and Math coaches, special education coordinator and parent coordinator for parents of newly enrolled kindergarten students. This program offers information on curriculum, ENL program, special needs, and extracurricular activities. During the school year, the ESL teacher conducts parent orientation for the ELLs throughout the year. This orientation informs parents on different available bi-lingual programs through the use of a video and brochures. Translation services are provided at these meetings. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A - We do not have a Dual Language Program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development opportunities are available to all staff in the school. In house professional development is offered by the ESL teacher on Election Day to all teachers and paraprofessionals. Each staff member receives two hours of development focusing on strategies to aid ELLs in the classroom. The UFT Teacher Center provides additional support to teachers of ELLs. This professional development is facilitated by a ELL specialist who provides 3 hours and 20 minutes of PD on such topics as Principles of Learning, CR Part 154, ENL strategies, language proficiency levels, Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS), Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP), and New Language Arts Progressions. The 0  School Secretaries receive professional development from the UFT and the Parent Coordinator attends development offered by the district. The ENL teacher attends monthly district meetings. In addition, the ENL teacher attends all in house professional development sessions to enhance her knowledge of school initiatives and programs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. School administrators and the UFT Teacher Center Instructional Coach set up a preliminary professional development calendar before the start of the academic year. At this time, 15% of professional development time is dedicated to ENL topics for all teachers. In addition to participating in this professional development, the ENL teacher attends monthly district meetings and any other pertinent professional development offered locally. Agendas and attendance sheets are maintained in the school file. The ENL teacher keeps a record of all activities in a compliance binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annual individual meetings are scheduled throughout the school year on Tuesday afternoons during the parent engagement time. Prior to the meeting, ENL teacher determines whether translation services are needed. If so, Parent Coordinator arranges for translation services. During the annual individual meetings with parents, in addition to discussing the goals of the program, the student's language progress as well as their test results, we also discuss their growth within all content areas using a holistic approach. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. For ELL students, engagement begins with a letter introducing and explaining the English acquisition program and an invitation to a Parent Orientation meeting in late September (and throughout the year as needed). Parents are also invited to meet individually with the ENL teacher to discuss their children's needs and how they will be met. Parental choice, as to what type of English learning program they can choose for their child is also explained. All parents here have opted for the ENL stand,alone model rather than transferring their children to dual language, transitional, or bilingual programs at other schools. When students enter the school in the middle of the year, parents/guardians are introduced to the ESL/ENL teacher who explains the program options. During the school year, meetings are held and telephone calls to parents are made as needed or as requested to encourage and support parent/guardian involvement with ELLs. Parents are encouraged to use their native language and to build literacy at home as well as in extracurricular settings. The native traditions and cultures of the students are shared and celebrated. The ENL teacher provides parents with websites where they can have access to great books in other languages. Also, ELL families are invited to all school events (Curriculum Night, Parent Teacher Conferences, parent workshops, assemblies, dances, and Parent Association meetings). Finally, the parent coordinator and administrators inform families about PDs for parents whenever they are offered by the city or by our district. When warranted translation services are provided for ELL families. 1  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Deborah Levine, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Dr. Selman Waksman School DBN: 11X178 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Deborah Levine Title Principal Jennifer Streppone Assistant Principal Yvette Vasquez Parent Coordinator Elisa Marcus ENL/Bilingual Teacher Geraldine Williams Parent Teacher/Subject Area Carolyn Jandelli Teacher/Subject Area Allison Hayden, Literacy Jean Staudt, Math Coach Coach Debra Penate School Counselor Samantha Dietzel Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Speech Provider 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x178 School Name: Dr. Selman Waksman School Superintendent: Jeremy Kabinoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yvette Vasquez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Parents of all incoming students are asked to complete the New York City Department of Education "Parent/Guardian Home Language Identification Survey". Using the information gathered from the language survey, parent interviews, blue emergency cards, and ATS reports, the school determines the individual written and oral translation needs of the parent community. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 5  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic English Spanish TWI URDU 1 522 18 2 1 0.18 95.96 3.31 0.37 0.18 0 519 22 2 1 0 95.4 4.04 0.37 0.18 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. September and as needed throughout school year Translated forms are available on DOE website. Home Language Surveys 6  All notification ESL/ENL letters September and as needed throughout school year Translated forms are available on DOE website. Invitation letters to ESL/ENL Orientation September and as needed throughout school year Parent-teacher conference announcements September, November, March and May Sports and Arts After School Program September - June After School Academic Program January - March After School Clubs April - June Parent Coordinator translates all of our parent facing documents so that our non-English speaking parents are kept informed of all the events and happenings at our school. If additional support is needed in this area, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for further assistance. Parent Coordinator translates all of our parent facing documents so that our non-English speaking parents are kept informed of all the events and happenings at our school. If additional support is needed in this area, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for further assistance. Parent Coordinator translates all of our parent facing documents so that our non-English speaking parents are kept informed of all the events and happenings at our school. If additional support is needed in this area, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for further assistance. Parent Coordinator translates all of our parent facing documents so that our non-English speaking parents are kept informed of all the events and happenings at our school. If additional support is needed in this area, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for further assistance. Parent Coordinator translates all of our parent facing documents so that our non-English speaking parents are kept informed of all the events and happenings at our school. If additional support is needed in this area, we will contact the Translation 7  Newsletters The last Monday of every month Saturday Academy March-April and Interpretation Unit for further assistance. Parent Coordinator translates all of our parent facing documents so that our non-English speaking parents are kept informed of all the events and happenings at our school. If additional support is needed in this area, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for further assistance. Parent Coordinator translates all of our parent facing documents so that our non-English speaking parents are kept informed of all the events and happenings at our school. If additional support is needed in this area, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for further assistance. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Tuesday afternoon Parent Engagement September - June Curriculum Night September interpretation service(s)? For our parents who are non-English speakers, the Parent Coordinator provides interpretation services. If we encounter a situation where she is not available or the parent speaks a different language than we do not understand, we contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit to provide the service for us and our parents. For our parents who are non-English speakers, the Parent Coordinator provides interpretation services. If we encounter a situation where she is not available or the parent speaks a different language than we do not understand, we contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit to 8  ESL/ENL Parent Orientation September - June Parent Teacher Conference Night November, March and May IEP meetings September - June provide the service for us and our parents. For our parents who are non-English speakers, the Parent Coordinator provides interpretation services. If we encounter a situation where she is not available or the parent speaks a different language than we do not understand, we contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit at to provide the service for us and our parents. For our parents who are non-English speakers, the Parent Coordinator provides interpretation services. If we encounter a situation where she is not available or the parent speaks a different language than we do not understand, we contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit to provide the service for us and our parents. Special Education Coordinator arranges for interpretation services provided by either the Parent Coordinator or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The School Messenger service will alert parents in both English and Spanish to any emergency situation. Bi-lingual staff members will be available to make and answer telephone calls. Additionally, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit to assist us and provide services in other languages as needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is reviewed each September by all staff during professional development. 9  The school will use the following resources to meet compliance of the regulation:  The Principal will designate a Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy.  The LAC will attend an in-person or online training  The LAC will provide the professional development to the staff in this area.  The ESL/ENL teacher will determine translation and interpretation needs of parents within thirty days of student's enrollment. LAC will arrange needed services with the Translation and Interpretation Unit.   Parents have the right to bring translators/interpreters of their choice.  Primary language of parent is noted on emergency contact cards and in ATS.  Copies of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 are available in the school's main office. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS. 178 believes in the importance of ensuring that all parents of ELLs are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education as described by Chancellor's Regulation A-663. PS 178 provides translated information via:  Welcome Posters  Parent's Bill of Rights  Parent's Guide to Language Access Language ID Guide   Parent Handbook Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents complete school survey. 0  1 
